1 Respondent/Cross -Applicant  
Nicholas Thomas  
 Fifth Witness Statement  
Exhibit NT4 
28.11.2024  
Claim No . CL-2017 -000323  
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE    
BUSINESS AND PROPERTY COURTS  OF ENGLAND & WALES  
COMMERCIAL COURT (KBD)  
 
IN THE MATTER OF GERALD MARTIN SMITH  
AND IN THE MATTER OF THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE ACT 1988  
B E T W E E N  
(1) THE SERIOUS FRAUD OFFICE  
(2) MR JOHN MILSOM AND MR DAVID STANDISH  
(as joint Enforcement Receivers in respect of the realisable property of Gerald Martin Smith)  
Applicants in the Proceedings  
-and- 
(1) LITIGATION CAPITAL LIMITED  
(a company incorporated in the Marshall Islands)  
and 45 others  
Respondents in the Proceedings  
-and- 
HARBOUR FUND II LP  
Applicant in the Harbour Application  
Respondent in the Thomas Cross -Application  
-and- 
MR NICHOLAS THOMAS  
Respondent in the Harbour Application  
Applicant in the Thomas Cross -Application  
 
___________________________________________________________  
FIFTH  WITNESS STATEMENT  OF NICHOLAS THOMAS  
_____________________________________________________________  
 
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FAA1.7/84
2 I, Nicholas Thomas, of  6 Cranbrook Road, London, W4 2LH , WILL STATE as follows:  
A. INTRODUCTION  
1. I am a party to these proceedings . I am one of the  Respondent s to an application by 
Harbour Fund II LP (“Harbour ”) (the “Harbour Application ”) and I make a cross -
application in respect of the same matters (the “Thomas Cross -Application ”) (together, 
the “Enforceability Applications ”). 
2. The facts and matters set out in this statement are within my own knowledge, unless the 
contrary is expressly stated.  Where they are within my own knowledge they are true to 
the best of my knowledge and belief.  Where the facts and matters are not within my own 
knowledge, I give the source of my information and believe them to be true.  
3. I refer to a paginated bundle of documents marked “Exhibit NT 4”.  It contains copies of 
the documents to which I refer in this statement.  Unless the context makes otherwis e 
clear, references to page numbers in this statement are to “Exhibit NT 4”.  
4. In outline, the Enforceability Applications  concern the enforceability (or otherwise) of the 
DBA element  of the Harbour Investment Agreement  dated 10 July 2013 (the “Harbour 
IA”) entered into by (among other people) Harbour  and me . My solicitor, Ms Tamar 
Halevy, has provided a witness statement  dated 28 November 2024  that addresses legal  
issues raised by the Enforceability Applications . This statement addresses some factual 
issues raised in  the 20th witness statement  dated 31 October 2024  of Mr Adam Zoubir , 
Harbour ’s solicitor,  served  in support of the Harbour Application  (“Zoubir 20 ”), as 
follows:  
(1) First,  I address the circumstances in which the Harbour IA was entered into and 
my no n-awareness in relation to the legal issues or arguments in the ‘PACCAR ’ 
litigation  up until judgment was handed down by the Supreme Court (R (on the 
application of P ACCAR Inc & Ors) v Competition Appeal Tribunal & Ors [2023] 
UKSC 28 (“PACCAR ”)) (Section B below) .  
(2) Second,  I address Harbour ’s attempt s to elide the conduct and positions of Dr 
Smith and Dr Cochrane with my conduct and my positions in these proceedings , 
including the  repeated  (and inaccurate)  use by Mr Zoubir in Zoubir 20  of the 
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FAA1.7/85
3 defined term, “the Smith Parties ”, when describing the conduct of one or more 
of Drs Smith and Cochrane, and me  (Section C below ).  
(3) Third , I respond  to other  discrete aspects of Zoubir 20 insofar as I am best placed 
to address them  (Section D below ).  
5. I understand that n one of these matters are strictly relevant  to the key points  under 
consideration in the Enforceability Applications , but I address them here since Harbour 
has attempted to make them relevant in Zoubir 20. I leave the relevance  issue s to my legal 
team to make submissions on  as required . 
6. In the interests of brevity, I respectfully ask that the Court rea ds Halevy 1 for an 
explanation of the background to the Enforceability Applications before considering this 
statement.  For that reason, where I use capitalised terms in this short statement which are 
not defined in this document, I adopt the definitions provided  in Halevy 1.  
B. THE ‘PACCAR  POINT ’ 
7. I first wish to address certain aspects of Mr Zoubir ’s comments to the effect that I knew 
or should have known about the potential P ACCAR  argument  (which I in fact discovered 
after the Supreme Court handed down its judgement in PACCAR) many years before  I 
raised it.  
8. I signed the Harbour IA in my individual capacity. I did so as a consumer and a lay person. 
Harbour proposed the terms set out in the Harbour IA on essentially a ‘take it or leave it ’ 
basis  in relation to the non -financial terms  and we accepted those terms. At no point was 
I provided legal advice on the specific terms of the Harbour IA before or at the time of 
entering into it , and I did not question , nor did I have any reason to question,  that Harbour 
had presented an enforceable contract for me to sign.   
9. Against that background, Mr Zoubir says:  
(1) At §35 of Zoubir 20:  
“The argument that the Harbour IA is a DBA has been available to the Orb 
Claimants since the agreement was first entered into  and the possibility that the 
funding arrangements such as the Harbour IA were in fact subject to the DBA 
Regulations has been publicly debated in legal, academic and political circles 
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FAA1.7/86
4 since at least 2014... ”  (my emphasis) ; and  
10. At §98 of Zoubir 20:  
“Harbou r's position is that the Orb Claimants could have argued that the 
Harbour IA was  a DBA and sought to undermine Harbour ’s entitlement under 
the agreement at any time  after it was agreed  (although possibly not 
immediately) . The DBA Regulations entered into force on 1 April 2013, and the 
Harbour IA was executed on 10 July 2013. As set out above, it is accepted that at 
that point, not even the Government believed that the DBA Regulations were 
going to apply to litigation fund ing agreements .” (my emphasis) .  
11. I note that Mr Zoubir  does not allege that I , in fact , knew of the P ACCAR  point, nor that I 
should  have known about it, at the outset of the Harbour IA. He alleges, in essence, that 
the potential P ACCAR  argument was “availa ble” to me in 2013 when the Harbour IA was 
signed (Zoubir 20, §35); that it had been “debated in legal, academic and political circles ” 
since 2014 (Zoubir 20, §35, §§101 -105); that until mid -2016 I was advised by Stewarts 
(Zoubir 20, §106); and that I part icipated in the Directed Trial without raising the potential 
P ACCAR  point (Zoubir 20, §§107 -114).  
12. I do not address in this statement any of the legal submissions that will be made on my 
behalf in due course. However, for the avoidance of doubt:  
(1) I had no knowledge whatsoever when I signed the Harbour IA that the DBA 
element  of it may not be enforceable in law, nor did I have any reason to 
suspect so. It was Harbour , a professional litigation funder that had  obviously 
received extensive legal advice on its standards term agreement  that it 
presented to  me, who was best placed to know whether that agreement  or its 
terms were (or may be) unenforceable. I relied on Harbour ’s standard terms  
being  compliant with relevant  legislation . My acceptance of Harbour ’s 
summary of the Harbour IA in its Statement of Case for the Directed Trial 
referred to in Zoubir 20  at §110 was based on this understanding .  
(2) I had no involvement in , or knowledge  whatsoever  of, the kind of debates in 
“legal, academic and political circles ” Mr Zoubir alleges were occurring from 
around 2014. I am (and was at all times after I signed the Harbour IA) a lay 
businessperson, not a legal academic or practitioner.  
(3) I certainly had never read the article relied on by Mr Zoubir from Professor 
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FAA1.7/87
5 Rachel Mulheron at that time (Mr Zoubir gives the title,  “England's unique 
approach to the self -regulation of third party funding: a critical analysis of 
recent developments ”). In this respect, Harbour refers to  me having signed  a 
letter to the Lord Chancellor in April 2024 (Zoubir 20, §103) which sought to 
oppose the litigation funding industry ’s attempts to lobby the then -
Government to impose legislation to retrospectively  reverse the effect of 
P ACCAR . That letter referred to Professor Mulheron ’s article from 2014. All 
that this letter shows is that, by April 2024 , I was aware of the P ACCAR  
decision and that Professor Mulheron had published a relevant article 10 years 
earlier. So far as I recall, I first discovered Professor Mulheron ’s article as a 
result of attending  a litigation funding conference  on 14 March 2024 (which I 
attended after  I became aware of  the Supreme Court ’s P ACCAR  decision  and 
began to appreciate its  potential significance for the Ha rbour IA , as to which 
see below ), at which Professor Mulheron sat on a panel. I thereafter did some 
limited research on her and read a synopsis of a paper  written by her  (which I 
assume to be the article  referred to in Zoubir 20 , although I do not recall 
precisely ). I did not read the article  itself. This has no bearing whatsoever on 
Mr Zoubir ’s contention that I should have been aware many years prior to 
2024 of Professor Mulheron ’s article (although I note he fails to explain why 
he says I should have bee n aware, and his suggestion that I should is, I believe, 
unreasonable ).   
(4) I had no awareness of the P ACCAR  litigation while it was (as I now 
understand) underway in the Competition Appeal Tribunal and then the Court 
of Appeal, or indeed at any time before the Supreme Court handed down its 
judgment. As above, I only became aware of this case, and  some of  the 
possible implications for the Harbour IA , the day after the Supreme Court 
handed down its judgment in P ACCAR  in July 2023 .Without any waiver of 
privilege,  in July 2023  I was engaged in other litigation involving a litigation 
funder and was informed by that f under of the P ACCAR  decision. It came as 
a surprise to me  (and, I understand, to much of the litigation funding and legal 
industries) . Once I became aware  of this decision  I began to appreciate the 
potential implications for the Harbour IA.  
(5) Mr Zoubir also points out that, until mid -2016, I was represented by Stewarts. 
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FAA1.7/88
6 This is correct; Stewarts acted for me  in relation to the Original Proceedings 
against Mr Andrew Ruhan (explained in Halevy 1) , but n ot in relation to 
whether or not the Harbour IA or the DBA  element of it was enforceable . 
Again, without waiving privilege, I did not seek or receive any advice from 
Stewarts  about the enforceability of all or part of  the Harbour IA because I 
was completely unaware of its potential unenforceability  in the period that I 
was represented by the firm , for the reasons explained  above . Further,  and also 
without  waiv ing privilege , I note a letter written by Stewarts (acting for me) 
and sent to MHS Sprecher Grier (acting for Harbour) in February 2017  about 
the Harbour IA  (page s 2-21). That letter was very critical of Harbour  but did 
not at any point raise the issue of the Harbour IA ’s enforceab ility. Mr Zoubir ’s 
suggestion in §106 of Zoubir 20, that Stewarts “were no doubt aware ” of the 
potential P ACCAR  point, therefore appears to be baseless. That assertion is 
also inconsistent with the settled view at the time that such agreements were 
not DBAs that had to meet the requirements of the DBA Regs 2013.   
(6) In the context summarised above, I respectfully suggest i t is obvious that 
neither I nor my legal team was aware of the P ACCAR  point until July 2023, 
at which point I took prompt steps to : take advice (privilege over which is not 
waived) ; raise the issue with Harbour, engage in the Pre -Action 
Correspondence set out in Halevy 1 ; and bring forward the Thomas Cross -
Application.  
13. For completeness, I note the  apparent insinuation in the second and third sentences of 
§106 of Zoubir 20 that the O rb Claimants (as defined, including me) knew or suspected 
that the Harbour IA was not enforceable before 2016 but said nothing at that time so that 
Harbour would advance litigation funding on a false basis:  
“I note that until mid -2016, the Orb Claimants we re represented by Stewarts Law , a firm with 
a very detailed understanding of litigation funding, and who were no doubt aware of the 
principles I outline above . It is also evident to me, however, that the Orb Claimants would 
have had no commercial interest seeking to undermine the Harbour IA while they were 
represented by Stewarts ...” (emphasis added).  
14. This is (if Mr Zoubir intends to make and stand by it) not a credible suggestion in the 
circumstances  I have described above , particularly where Harbour was the party who 
proposed the terms and was a specialist and knowledgeable litigation funder, whereas I 
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FAA1.7/89
7 was a lay person.  
15. Indeed, I note that neither  Mr Zoubir or an y person from Harbour has given evidence on 
whether (and if, so when) Harbour  itself became aw are of the potential PACCAR point, 
whether as at the outset of the Harbour IA or from 2014 onwards. However, it seems to 
me that either:  
(1) Harbour was aware of the potential P ACCAR  point either (i) at the outset of 
the Harbour IA, in which case it presented me with a contract which it had 
reasonable grounds to believe was not enforceable by it, or (ii) at some date 
between 2014 and the Directed Trial Judgment being handed down in 2021, 
and thus permitted the Court in the Directed Trial Proceedings to make 
unsustainable findings as to its entitlements under the Harbour IA on a (at least 
potentially) false premise; or  
(2) Harbour was not  aware of the P ACCAR  point at any of these points  and did 
not become aware of it u ntil the Supreme Court decision , in which case 
Harbour is now arguing that I, a lay person and consumer, should have been 
aware of a highly technical legal argument about the enforceability of 
litigation funding agreements (whether when we signed the Harbour IA or 
from 2014) before  Harbour, a specialist  and market -leading litigation funder 
at the time, became  aware  of it. 
16. There is at least some evidence to suggest that the first of these scenarios was the case  in 
the peculiar language included by Harbour in Schedule 2 :  
17. That language was:  
“At the date of  this Agreement, the parties have agreed that the anticipated value of the 
Causes of Action is at least £100,000,000. On that basis, it is currently anticipated that, after 
any payments to HF2, the Claimants will receive at least 50% of the Proceeds includ ing where 
the multiple set out in this Schedule 2 is the applicable basis for calculating HF2's share of 
the Proceeds .”  
18. This appears to be an oblique reference to the requirement  in Regulation 4(3) of the DBA 
Regs 2013  (explained in  Halevy 1 ) which I unde rstand  requir es that a DBA no t provide 
for payment above an amount which, including V AT, is equivalent to 50% of the sums 
ultimately recovered by the funded party.   I can think of no other reason why the Harbour 
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FAA1.7/90
8 IA would contain language such as this. I th erefore believe  that Harbour  may have  
included these comments in Schedule 2 because it (unlike me) was aware of at least the 
possibility that the  Harbour IA needed to comply with the DBA Regs 2013 . 
C. MR ZOUBIR ’S PREJUDICIAL COMMENTS ON THE PURPOSE OF MY 
APPL ICATION  
19. In this section, I respond to Harbour ’s attempts in Zoubir 20 to provide the Court with 
prejudicial and inaccurate  commentary about my involvement in these and other 
proceedings, and in particular the insinuation  (for purely prejudicial purposes ) that my 
role in relation to the Enforceability Applications  is, in effect, that of a puppet for Dr 
Gerald Smith.  
20. Mr Zoubir seeks to encapsulate those prejudicial comments with the descriptor “the Smith 
Parties ”. He uses this defined term throughout Zoubir  20 to refer to me when he is in fact 
addressing the (alleged) conduct of Drs Cochrane and/or Smith , who I understand are ex -
spouses  (Zoubir  20, §6). I reject this mischaracterisation of my distinct role and interest 
in these proceedings . I consider much o f Zoubir 20 to be an attempt to distract the Court 
from the substantive merits  of my position (both in resisting the Harbour Application and 
in making the Thomas Cross -Application) . 
21. For example, Mr Zoubir makes  numerous  allegations concerning  the alleged c onduct of  
“the Smith Parties ”, including  after the Directed Trial  (e.g. Zoubir  20, Section D). 
However,  as explained in paragraph 25 below,  almost all  of these allegations concern the 
behaviour of Dr Cochrane and/or Dr Smith alone  which, although Mr Zoubir  attempts to 
elide their actions with mine via his self -supplied def inition of  “the Smith Parties ”, simply 
do not concern me  and I had no role in  bringing about . He also attempts to wrap into 
Harbour ’s conspiracy theory actions of mine which were undertaken simply  in an attempt  
to vindicate my obvious commercial interests.  Harbour ’s attempt to say that these actions 
were part of a wider conspiracy with Drs Cochrane and Smith, for an improper purpose, 
is wrong and, indeed, simply illogical.  
22. The high point of this conspiracy theory is at paragraph 51 of Zoubir 20:  
“It is clear from this correspondence and my prior knowledge of these proceedings that the 
actions of Dr Cochrane and Mr Thomas are being orchestrated by Dr Smith  in order to force 
the Settlement Parties, including Harbour to expend further time and costs and to erode the 
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FAA1.7/91
9 value of the assets under the management of the various office holders, and, via threats of 
interminable legal action by Dr Smith and/or his prox ies, to pressurise the Settlement Parties 
into foregoing the fruits of their success at the Directed Trial .” (my emphasis) .  
23. That is false. In making  and defending  the Enforceability Applications, I  am not acting on 
behalf of  or somehow as a proxy for  Dr S mith or Dr Cochrane  and neither of them are 
“orchestrating ” my actions . I am simply defending my own interests in the Proceeds.   
24. In reality, Zoubir 20 presents a jumble of different  alleged  activities , undertaken by 
different commercial parties with differ ing commercial interests, as a single unified 
strategy by using the “Smith Parties ” label . The vagueness and convenience (for Harbour) 
of this label is highlighted in Zoubir 20  at §6, which does not even limit the number of 
people whose action s it intends to capture as part of the alleged conspiracy : 
“This application has been necessitated by the actions and conduct of the now thrice - convicted 
fraudster, Dr Gerald Smith (“Dr Smith ”), and parties and entities closely associated with him, 
includi ng but not limited to his ex -wife, Dr Gail Cochrane (“Dr Cochrane ”) and Messrs 
Nicholas Thomas and Roger Taylor (“Messrs Thomas and Taylor ”), (together “the Smith 
Parties ”)” (my emphasis)  
25. I am also concerned that Harbour ’s alleged conspiracy does not appea r to even be 
supported by the actions cited by Mr Zoubir in his statement in support of the same  
(notwithstanding his use of “the Smith Parties ” when describing them ): 
(1) Most of the  alleged  conduct  relied on by Mr Zoubir  plainly has nothing to do 
with me . For example : 
a. Dr Cochrane ’s alleged resistance of “steps ” taken by the Enforcement 
Receivers  (§50.1);  
b. The alleged failure of Dr Smith “and others ” (but not including me) to 
give vacant possession of some properties in breach of a court order 
(§50.2)  and Dr Smith ’s arguments about his apparent “rights over ” these 
properties (§50.19);  
c. Dr Smith being convicted of contempt of court in July 2022 (§50.6)  and 
facing further contempt of court accusations by the SFO  in October 2024 
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FAA1.7/92
10 (§50.16) ;1 
d. Dr Smith being c onvicted of fraud in July 2024 in connection with 
COVID -19 Bounce Back Loan s (§50.1 5); 
e. Drs Smith and Cochrane (i.e. not including me)  commencing an 
arbitration and having an anti -arbitration injunction made against them 
(§50.12);  
f. Dr Cochrane ’s so-called Sl ip Rule Application (§50.13) . Zoubir 20 
explains in §§64 -71 the basis and outcome of the Slip Rule Application 
by Dr Cochrane.  Mr Zoubir explains that this  was an application  by 
which Dr Cochrane sought to amend the Consequentials Order to have 
Orb removed  from the list of Non -Arena Companies . These paragraphs 
of Zoubir 20 recognise that I had nothing to do with that application and 
had no interest in its outcome . Indeed, the excerpt in §68 of Zoubir 20 
shows  adverse findings  as to apparent cooperation between Dr Smith 
and Dr Cochrane in relation to Dr Cochrane ’s Slip Rule Application , but 
makes no reference to me at all  in this respect ; 
g. Arguments run by Dr Cochrane with respect to the LCL Settlement 
Agreement  (as defined in Zoubir 20)  (§50.17) , which (a s I explain 
below) I was not a party to and had no involvement in agreeing , 
notwithstanding Mr Zoubir ’s attempts throughout his statement to refer 
to “the Smith Parties ” in relation to the LCL Settlement ; and 
h. An application by Dr Smith to discharge the SFO ’s Restraint and 
Confiscation Orders made against him in 2005 and 2007 respectively 
(which, again, has nothing to do with me)  (§50.18) .  
(2) I note that , in his attempts  to use the prejudicial “Smith Parties ” descriptor in 
Zoubir 20  so as to include me , Mr Zoubir  routinely clarif ies at certain points  
that, although he is using that descriptor, I was not in fact involved in the 
                                                           
1 I note that Zoubir 20 states that these further contempt of court proceedings “ are due to be heard in October 
2024 ” where Zoubir 20 was itself served on the final day of October 2024.  
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FAA1.7/93
11 activities alleged . For example : 
a. Zoubir 20  at §40: “Shortly thereafter and just before Dr Smith was due 
to give evidence, on 27 J anuary 2021, the Smith Parties (including Dr 
Smith and Dr Cochrane, but not including Messrs Thomas and 
Taylor)  entered into a settlement agreement )” (my emphasis) ;  
b. Zoubir 20 at §50, to which I object f or the reasons set out in paragraph 
23 above; and 
c. Zoubir 20  at §86: “It has become apparent to Harbour, and to me, that 
the Smith Parties , in particular Dr Smith and Dr Cochrane , have never 
intended to honour the terms of the LCL Settlement Agreement) ” and 
“While no party has formally sought to challenge the validity of the LCL 
Settlement Agreement, several of the Smith Parties have acted in clear 
breach of its terms ” (my emphases) . Mr Zoubir obviousl y cannot 
(legitimately) criticise me  for not complying with a settlement 
agreement to which I am not and have never been a party, and his use of 
the words “in particular Dr Smith and Dr Cochrane ” and “several of 
the Smith Parties ” obscure my  non-role in the LCL Settlement 
Agreement  to preserve Harbour ’s prejudicial “the Smith Parties ” 
descriptor .  
(3) There are certain other alleged events raised by Mr Zoubir that do relate to 
me. Whilst those events are more factually complicated than Mr Zoubir 
suggests (as to which I reserve my rights to respond if necessary), none of 
them support Mr Zoubir ’s conspiracy theory that my actions are 
“orchestrated ” by Dr Smith and/or I am merely one of his “proxies ”. I have 
my own real and legitimate interests in re lation to the Harbour Trust and the 
Harbour IA which are (as Harbour readily accepts) in conflict with Harbour ’s 
interests.  
26. It is simply inaccurate  to describe me as one of “the Smith Parties ” in this case . I have an 
obvious and direct commercial interest  in these Enforceability Applications (and other 
applications) myself as one of the original Claimants in the Original Proceedings and /or 
as one of the beneficiaries  of the Harbour Trust/Proceeds . I simply do not understand how 
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FAA1.7/94
12 it can be said  that I am pur suing the Thomas Cross -Application or resisting the Harbour 
Application for improper reasons or (secretly) at the behest of Dr Smith or Dr Cochrane 
(or both of them) when I  have  such obvious and  significant  interest s of my own  in relation 
to the Enforceability A pplications .  
27. All I seek in the  Enforceability Applications is to prevent Harbour from enforcing the 
DBA element of the Harbour IA and thereby taking a substantial portion of the Proceeds 
to which I would otherwise be entitled, because Harb our’s standard form litigation funding 
agreement now appears not to comply with regulatory requirements and, as a result, to be 
partly unenforceable, as explained in Halevy 1. That is, I believe , a completely proper 
course of action for me to have taken, a nd in no way an  improper  purpose .  
28. It seems to me that Harbour ’s strategy in  large portions of  Zoubir 20 is simply to raise as 
many prejudicial (and untrue) points as possible to distract the Court from  the relevant 
substantive issues  between Harbour and m e. Those issues are covered in full in Halevy 1 
and concern , only : (i) the compliance of the DBA element of the Harbour IA with the 
relevant legislation; (ii) the consequences of that non -compliance; (iii) Harbour ’s legal 
argument that it is possible to se ver the illegal or unenforceable  parts ; and (iv) even if the 
DBA  is unenforceable , whether  I should be prevented from making the argument that it is 
unenforceable and the Court should simply rubber stamp the DBA as though it was 
enforceable , on technical grounds such as limitation, abuse and estoppel .  
29. I wish to add  by way of final comment that, although I have attempted to address in outline 
terms the attempts by Mr Zoubir to implicate me in the  wrongful  actions of others  and to 
thereby cast  doubt on the reasons for my involvement in the Enforceability Applications , 
I have not provided a line -by-line response to the relevant parts of Zoubir 20. I do not 
consider it is proportionate or appropriate to do so given  their irrelevance  to the 
Enforc eability Applications (which  I understand, at their core, concern  technical legal 
issues  dealing with the consequences of the P ACCAR decision ) and the sheer volume of 
prejudicial commentary in Zoubir 20. To be clear, where I have not specifically addressed  
above a point in Zoubir 20, that should not be taken as an acceptance of the truth of the 
allegation or of its relevance to the Enforceability Applications.  
D. OTHER DISCRETE ISSUES  
30. In this short section , I address some discrete factual issues raised in Zoub ir 20 on which I 
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FAA1.7/95
13 am best placed to comment.  
31.  First, I note paragraph 70 of Zoubir 20, which says:  
“Perhaps in response to the concerns raised by the Jersey Court over her characterisation of 
the ownership of Orb, Dr Cochrane ’s position in Jersey has more recently developed, such that 
she now concedes that “it is correct that paragraph 16 of the Order of  Foxton J dated 11 June 
2021… states that Dr Smith holds 100% of the equitable interest of the shares in the Non -Arena 
Companies (listed in Schedule 2 of that Order) ”. However, in order to maintain her position in 
respect of Orb ’s recall application, Dr Co chrane now argues that “the Directed Trial did not 
determine the ownership of the assets owned by the Non -Arena Companies ”, which, for the 
first time, she now asserts “are held on resulting trust of [sic] the benefit of the Orb Claimants ”. 
(page 1061)  Dr C ochrane has not yet elucidated how her arguments regarding Orb are to her 
own benefit, given that she holds no interest in Orb, and it is not a fully accurate statement in 
any event, given that the IUAs (which the Directed Trial did determine ownership of)  were 
owned by various Non -Arena Companies .” (my emphasis)  
32. I understand that this issue is  not material  to the Enforceability Applications . However, in 
the interests of factual accuracy, I note that , although Harbou r is correct that the ownership 
of the sh ares in the Non -Arena Companies was determined by Mr Justice Foxton in the 
Directed Trial Judgment, ownership of the assets said to be held by those Non -Arena 
Companies  (i.e. the Non -Arena Assets)  was not so determined .  
33. This was confirmed  by Mr Justice Fo xton in an email from his clerk timed at 15:32 on 22 
June 2021  (pages 22-30): 
“The Judge has now reviewed the submissions from the parties on the terms of the order and 
has approved the order in the terms of the attached draft. His brief reasons for the decision 
appear below...  
[...] 
The declaration concerns only the shares in the N on Arena Companies and says nothing about 
anybody ’s claim to underlying assets of those companies. No language addressing proprietary 
claims to underlying assets is required .” 
34. Although that resolves the issue, I note  that it was further recognised  by a let ter dated 24 
July 2024  sent to me by Stephenson Harwood  LLP on behalf of the Enforcement Receivers  
(pages 39-40), which noted  at §4.2:  
“As recorded at paragraph 16 of the order made on 11 June 2021, the Directed Trial did 
determine ownership of the share i n CCBV (finding that it was held by Dr Cochrane as nominee 
for Dr Smith, such that 100% of the equitable interest is Dr Smith's realisable property) but did 
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FAA1.7/96
14 not determine ownership of any assets held by CCBV (as you have noted). ”2 
35. The reference to ‘CCBV ’ was to Casa Coloniches B.V .,  one of the Non -Area Companies.   
36. Finally, I note Mr Zoubir makes a series of comments on the extent to which Harbour 
relied on the Harbour IA (which, as above, I believe to be its standard form contract from 
that time , and was drafted by Harbour ) to its detriment, with a view to persuading the 
Court that, whatever the merits of the Enforceability Applic ations, it would be unfair for 
Harbour to be deprived of the sums it claims under the  DBA element of the  Harbour IA.  
37. Although this is , again,  irrelevant to the substance of the Enforceability Applications, I 
would briefly make the following additional observations:  
(1) Whilst it may be a matter for legal submissions in due course, I understand 
that the purpose of the legislation set out in Halevy 1 is to protect lay people 
and/or consumers like me when accessing the kinds of services it regulates 
(including the services Harbour provides).  I find it difficult to  see how 
Harbour can fairly complain  about the lega l effect of its  own failure: it s 
standard term agreement failing to comply with regulatory requirements .  
(2) Second,  I note that, whilst the Original Proceedings were settled many years 
ago, I to date have still received nothing from the Proceeds of those Ori ginal 
Proceedings. I have therefore been kept out of my share of those Proceeds for 
a very long time myself .  
(3) Third , the Court is asked to note  precisely what Harbour says it is entitled to 
under the DBA element of the Harbour IA (and considers it unfair t hat it now 
does not have). I respectfully refer the Court to a letter dated 2 July 2021 from 
Harcus Parker (on behalf of Harbour) to my former solicitors  (pages 31 -38). 
In that letter:  
a. Harbour asserted that the total estimated realisable value of the asset s 
held within the Harbour Trust pursuant to the Harbour IA at that time 
                                                           
2 I make no further comment on the other aspects of this letter given t heir apparent irrelevance to the 
Enforceability Applications.  
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FAA1.7/97
15 was £23,865,935.70;  
b. Harbour went on in that letter to state that, on the assumption its 
valuation was correct (which  is disputed), the minimum to which 
Harbour would be entitled under  the Harbour IA  was £25,945,052.40; 
and 
c. On this basis, Harbour considered it was entitled to take  the entirety  of 
the Proceeds (as defined) and I, together with the other funded parties to 
the Harbour IA, should receive nothing  from the Proceeds of the 
Original Proceedings in which we were the Claimants.  
38. Accordingly, to the extent it is relevant, I do not accept  Mr Zoubir ’s suggestion that  
Harbour is the (or a) victim  of its own  failure to ensure that  the Harbour IA complied  with 
regulatory requirements  aimed at preventing precisely the kind of behaviour  – riding 
roughshod over the interests of lay consumers  – illustrated in paragraph 37(3) above . 
STATEMENT OF TRUTH  
I believe that the facts stated in this witness statement are true. I understand that proceedings 
for contempt of court may be brought against anyone who makes, or c auses to be made, a false 
statement in a document verified by a statement of truth without an honest belief in its truth.  
 
SIGNED : ………………………………….  
Nicholas Thomas  
 
DATE :  28 November 2024  
 
 
Docusign Envelope ID: 328376DD-7C21-4C4F-BBD4-471C12A063FA
A1.7/98