Witness Statement session (Elyas Abaris)-20250624_102110-Meeting Recording
June 24, 2025, 9:21AM
1h 12m 32s

Nitisha Acharya started transcription

Elyas Abaris   0:03
And yeah, that was one of the key things that you see all sort of advertise and that I was really keen on because I thought it would be really helpful for understanding and things like that.
And off the top of my head that I think that's what I could think of.

   0:18
So does that sound like some good reason? I mean, so they can access to cadavers.
That that quite unusual then that was that sort of particular element available that you see other wasn't available elsewhere was it is that your point that sort of hands on access?

Elyas Abaris   0:37
Yeah. So it it is available in a few other universities, but it is quite rare. Most universities don't do that. They don't let you actually dissect yourself.

   0:48
Yeah.

Elyas Abaris   0:49
Whereas UCL is one of the few universities that do that you do that, get that hands on approach.

   0:58
The previous interview that you're a London resident, right? You're born in Bondbrand, London, I think. Did you?

Elyas Abaris   1:03
Yes, that's right.

   1:04
Yeah. So what? What I was wondering was why it was UCL. There are other good universities in London and why that do Madison?
And and why it was UCL in particular, but that was.
Really helpful. Yeah. Sounds like you've addressed that, yeah.
And we're staying in London. Important to you? Or is it just? It wouldn't have been decisive if you found a uni elsewhere. That.

Elyas Abaris   1:28
I think I mean, I had gotten into other universities elsewhere. I think it's just, I couldn't imagine myself anywhere else than in London. I think so that it did play a key part as well in deciding.

   1:42
I know what you mean, don't worry.
Right. And before you registered your course with UCL, did you sort of do anything in terms of visiting the campus or attending open day?
Or did you know anybody who previously attended UCL that you were speaking to at the time?

Elyas Abaris   2:10
So.
I mean, before even getting to the sort of the application period.
I was part of a widening participation scheme run by UCL.
For yeah, so. So my sort of contact with UCL started quite far back. Even before then, I'd had work experience at Uclh.
And also work experience in AUC or laboratory in the Institute of Child Health.
So sort of it does. I've had quite a few experiences with UCL before even getting to that point.
And then after I did get an offer, I think I did attend an open day beforehand and then I attended an offer holders day afterwards as well.

   3:00
Yeah.
And.
When you at the point of, I believe you accepted your offer around February 2018.
And it seems a bit of a silly question to ask, but when you're accepted.
Your offer to study at UCL at that point, what what sort of format did you expect the teaching to take and how would you expect? How did you expect the teaching to be delivered?

Elyas Abaris   3:35
So I think I knew that UCL. So there's I think there's three different sort of methodologies that medical school sort of approach teaching in. And I think UCL was, I'm struggling to remember from when I was applying, but I think UCL had sort of a more.
Merged approach in which you have your face to face lectures, but they also sort of interweave it with.
Sort of hands on experience as well. So I expected to have a mix of those lectures and also a lot of sort of hands on time in the lab, in the hospital sort of supplement the lectures.

   4:17
Yeah.

Elyas Abaris   4:17
Whereas I think a lot of there's a lot of unis where it's sort of split, you have all your lectures in the first few years and then afterwards you have only clinical time and no lectures at all, whereas you see all had sort of that merged format and it's sort of supposed to carry on like that throughout the six years.

   4:38
And.
Between, well, when you started your Co, op's between in 2018, that was and just before COVID March 2020. What format did your teaching take? Was that the format that you expected?
To have.

Elyas Abaris   4:58
Yeah, so I think.

   5:01
Merged teaching that you've mentioned.

Elyas Abaris   5:01
Yeah. So I think in the first year and three months.
It pre COVID it's sort of stuck to that format. It was, you know, experiences in hospital were quite rare because it was quite early on. But I sort of definitely a lot of experience in the labs whether that be the anatomy lab or.
Sort of the the our problem based learning labs where we sort of do some sort of experiments and things like that. So that's what it was for the first year and three months.
That I think around.
February, maybe March. I think when all of this with COVID started to.
Rear its head. It was switched to, you know, fully online lectures only. There were there weren't any sort of opportunities to come in and do any of this face to face. Hands on learning at all.

   6:00
So in other words, the form of teaching and delivery method that was important to you and you that you contracted for evaporate it essentially and it was replaced with something else completely different.
Which was not what you.

Elyas Abaris   6:13
Yeah.

   6:13
Expected back in 2018.

Elyas Abaris   6:16
Yeah.

   6:17
Yeah, that make, I mean that makes sense, obviously. I mean part of part of the other team, I said this at the beginning. You might remember when we put together or when you're when your individual particulars claim were put together.
It referred to the prospectus that you see undergraduate prospectus and the elements that spectus that talked about medical students as well.
And again, there's this sort of butting heads with UCL because on one hand we say we provide extracts that say things like.
You'll you'll be in the heart of London and you'll you'll get outstanding academic pressure on social Benefits, campus benefits, all you need to fulfil your potential is here at the heart of one capital world's great capital cities, museums, collections you mentioned museums.
Other various photos that we talk about in this respect.
Which they then seek in in response to this, to downplay, say, well, it's just a couple of photos of people having found in a quad. It doesn't mean anything. One can't reasonably infer from that that you could get in person teaching.

Elyas Abaris   7:13
Yeah.

   7:20
Save, of course, we say for the fact that everybody gave conclusive teaching until COVID and that's that's the differentiating factor. But is that is that you're sorry to take it slightly out of secrets, but when you're in the lead up to starting, I'm assuming that.
You're, you know, part of what you're anticipating was based on what you what you had been told would happen or what you know, you could look at online prospectus or a ******** prospectus and see these things. And it wouldn't have occurred to you that.
You may be. You may get teaching some completely other way.
Why? Or it was even open to UCL to say, hey, you've seen the prospectus. You have certain expectation as to what you're going to get here, but guess what we're going to do the whole thing online starting in 2018. I mean that's that's not what you signed up for is really what I'm saying in that way.

Elyas Abaris   8:09
Yeah.

   8:11
Yeah.

Elyas Abaris   8:12
Yeah, absolutely. I mean or in the lead up to sort of starting at UCL and even before sort of accepting my offer. You know, you're starting university, you're entering a new phase of your life, you're really excited, you're searching up all these prospectuses and even, you know, those images which they say aren't important. You know, you do look at these things and you build up this image in your head as well of sort of what it's going to be for you.

   8:31
Yes.

Elyas Abaris   8:38
You know when you're in these locations and you know, doing these things.
And you know, if they weren't relevant, why would they be included in the prospects just to begin with?

   8:44
Yeah.
Well said. Well said. Absolutely. And that, and that's one of the points we take, I mean and you know another way of putting it and sadly it's a very long time ago for me. But at the time that you start your undergraduate degree, it is it's sort of a first step into adulthood, but it's it's that's the most significant step you've taken.
At that stage of your life, I don't know. I don't know if that's a bit sort of melodramatic, but I don't know if you know what I mean by that, because everything associated with it is, is sort of stepping away from a school environment almost from childhood into an independent adult environment, which, which is, which is, which is all about independent learning, of course.
But independent learning and taking a step towards a career I don't. I mean, for me it was a massive deal and I'm.
I'm I'm.
Guessing the T-shirt was for you, and I'm sure it was les for you as well. But what's in your mouth? But that's just my recollection of it and.

Elyas Abaris   9:34
Yeah.

   9:39
And that's why it doesn't really sit well for UCL to downplay these things, as you say, because they're huge, hugely significant at the time.

Elyas Abaris   9:42
Yeah.

   9:47
OK.
Yeah.

Elyas Abaris   9:48
Yeah, I'd say The thing is, especially when you're, like you said, you're transitioning to this new sort of period of your life and it's all sort of quite daunting and quite scary because you don't know what to expect. You've never been through it before. You sort of use the information that you have sort of prepare yourself for what to expect. And so at least some things won't shock you and some things won't stress you out. So.
So you know, you build up this image of what to expect and how you're going to deal with whatever problems arise and things like that. And when everything takes a complete turn and it's, you know, you're already dealing with, living on your own for the first time and all of this, you expect, at least, you know, the image you had of university life to be constant. And when that completely changes, you know, you're like, oh, you know, I'm I'm only a new adult and I'm have. Everything's been turned on its heads, you know, and.

   10:32
Yeah.

Elyas Abaris   10:39
Yeah.

   10:40
It's a lot to deal with. I mean, it had the prospectors been.
100 blank pages saying we can't tell you what you're going.
To get so.
I think you probably want to take a different view about signing up, but yeah, no, I really hear.
What?
You're saying, OK, I'll be quiet.
So this is so we're kind of at the point where covid's, you know, people are just sort of.
You.
Know finding out what's happening about COVID and things are starting to change for you and you mentioned that things pretty much.
Went exclusively online quite quickly in March and just generally on the on the facility.
And sorry to go back a little bit, but between just before COVID.
Presumably.
You had access to the facilities that required you to effectively, you know, study your course and would is that just limited to labs or was there anything else that you used like labs and libraries or was there anything?
Medicine specific that you used a lot during that time prior to COVID.

Elyas Abaris   11:55
So I'd say I think in sort of preparation for our final exams in.
First year and 2nd year I mean The thing is we also had access to the Clinical Skills Lab in which you know, we'd practise things like taking blood pressure and things like that.
The only thing is is that when we had our second year final exams, they scrapped the practical portion of our exams, so I wouldn't say that was particularly particularly needed.
At that time, although it did mean that because we lacked that sort of practise in second year and 3rd year is sort of a year out of medicine.
When you do get to those fourth year exams and it's the first practical exams that really matter and are really actually quite difficult, you have, we I we hadn't had any sort of practical experience since our first year.
And I think that was quite a difficult transition because we'd had absolutely nowhere to practise until then.
And I mean.
I think it might be quite relevant to say that's also the only year of medicine where I had to retake my practical exam.
So the actual sort of knowledge the written portion was fine. I'd passed that completely fine, but the practical bit I had to reset.
And maybe if I'd had access to sort of those labs going, you know, second, third year things would have been better, but.

   13:25
Yes.
Can I ask is it?
Suggested by UCL.
In their individual defence to your individual particular claims.
Was subject to supervision and I just and that might be right, but I just want to understand a little bit. I mean as in if you wanted to to do something in a lab, what do I mean revision might not be the best way of describing it, but just practise a particular skill or spend some time there working on something. Were you able to do that?
Or did that always have to be done as part of?
A practical session with a supervisor. How did that? How did that work?

Elyas Abaris   14:15
So.
In terms of.
I mean anatomy Labs, for example. So someone always had to be there.
In terms of sort of experimentation and things like that, I guess someone also always had to be there.
In terms of clinical skills, someone didn't have to be there, but they had to sort of book us in for sessions, where the things would be available where it would have to be set up beforehand.
So for the Clinical Skills lab.
We wouldn't need a supervisor per SE. There the whole time, they just need to set up things beforehand.
In my third year, so the year that wasn't medicine based, it was sort of much more science, you know, specifically based.
Where I had that project that was, you know, supposed to be 100% lab based. I think one of the key reasons that's one of the key things that stops me from being able to go to the lab was the fact that I needed supervision.
And my supervisor for my project was someone who I can't remember the term for it, but he was more at risk because of COVID so he wasn't able to come in more than sort of once or twice.
He was shielding. I can't remember this. Yeah.

   15:42
Yeah, that's what they used to call it, yeah.
I.
See and they couldn't find somebody else.
To sort of step in for him in his absence.

Elyas Abaris   15:51
No, not really.

   15:55
Did they try or did they just say it's unfortunate that your supervisor's shielding, and that's just the way it is for the?

Elyas Abaris   16:02
So I think at one point they did suggest I have a PhD student.
One of my supervisor's PhD students attempt to supervise me in the lab, and I went once I tried it out once, but this is someone who has their own things that they're dealing with. He's doing his own research. He doesn't know anything about what I'm doing, and you know he's.

   16:25
Yeah.

Elyas Abaris   16:28
He's there to make sure I don't cause a fire, but at the end of the day, he's not actually supervising my project or know anything about it, so sort of help me.
Do anything. That's all.

   16:38
Got it.

Elyas Abaris   16:40
And in terms of raising any sort of concerns about that, it was very difficult at the time because we were going through course directors. I think the previous course director at the time had been suspended. We didn't have one for a while, then we had one who wasn't really up to date on what was happening.

   17:04
That's helpful. I mean going back.
To the point you made.
A clinical skill, a clinical skills lab session not requiring supervision per SE, but instead requiring a.

Elyas Abaris   17:11
Yep.

   17:15
Set up I.
Think I think you mentioned earlier that an example of clinical skill might be, you know, learning to to take blood pressure or something like that, but generally.

Elyas Abaris   17:22
Yep.

   17:25
Is that something you?
You wanted to do or did do a lot go to the lab for these sort of clinical skills sessions. So was that quite uncommon? Was it something you would have done more?
I'm thinking about this this period where you would be denied lab access effectively, but their cases where you could only have had it with supervision. But you've now explained the position is not quite that. It's not quite that stark and you could have used it for clinical skills. Is that something you?

Elyas Abaris   17:42
Yeah.

   17:54
Would have done or.
Did seek to do or was a big part of the way you approached?
Your course or.
Or or was it not so much?

Elyas Abaris   18:01
I mean absolutely, I think it is definitely something that I would have done because I think I mean these practical skills are always going to be important and they're assessed in almost every single year.
And you know, I I think in fourth year when sort of COVID was still going on, but they've sort of relaxed it a bit. We were allowed access to these clinical skills labs, but it would be sort of you know minimum number of people in there at a time. And yeah, we wouldn't have any supervisors in there. They, they they could sort of.

   18:23
Yeah.

Elyas Abaris   18:35
You could request someone to come and help you out if you didn't know how to do something, but it would just be us, you know, with these mannequins, with these models or each other just practising. And that wasn't even an option in second year.

   18:52
That's very helpful.
And in relation to your, the clinical science module specifically.

Elyas Abaris   19:01
Mm hmm.

   19:02
Is is it by nature? Is it a practical module that requires sort of access to labs and stuff? Because the reason why I ask is that UCL stayed that this is this module was more of a library based project as they put it and.
As such that they don't, it's not required to collect data in a laboratory.
I don't know what your thoughts are on that.

Elyas Abaris   19:31
So I'd actually submitted evidence to refute this.
So they'd given us a list of projects to pick from, and it was clearly sort of written whether each project would be library based or whether it be laboratory based. And I'd specifically picked.
A research project that was laboratory based and you know, it was written in two parts. It was it was written 1st that it was laboratory laboratory based and that the main campus, the main campus for it would be the UCL protein crystallography laboratory laboratory, you know.
It was, it was pretty clear cut to me.
And I wanted something that was fully lab based.

   20:18
And and is this the the project that?
You.
Received a 2 month an extension. A short period of extension. I don't know if you recall.

Elyas Abaris   20:30
Yeah.

   20:32
I thought OK and and during that time when you received the extension.
Did you get access to the labs? Do you recall whether you got access?

Elyas Abaris   20:44
So The thing is, the only reason we got that extension was had nothing to do with COVID.
It was our entire sort of cohort, I think, of about 25 students in clinical sciences. And the reason why we've gotten it was because of the problems with the course director where we were going between course directors, they were replacing the old one with a new one and we had a gap where we had absolutely no guidance or sort of no help with what direction.
To take our projects in.
No other sort of third year courses had this extension. It was only us specifically because of that course director problem.
And the at that point the extension sort of really only served to help us with writing our theses.
I don't think it gave me any sort of extra lap time and it wouldn't have made a difference anyway because my supervisor was shielding and you know, could only go in once a month.

   21:50
It's interesting you say that because in the defence UCLOS seek credit for this two-month extension, so they were they were doing you a favour, but it does sound quite quite bright. Basically what you said.
I am I'm wondering whether it might be helpful to take you to a couple of documents.
In.
In disclosure, and it might help assist with refreshing your memory.
Because it's five years ago now, we're talking about.
Going to share my screen.
And let me know if you can.
Davis. So it's like.
OK.
8.
Can you see that?

Elyas Abaris   23:45
Yes, I can.

   23:49
So this is taking you back to around the time of COVID?
It's an e-mail.
From.
That biggest light?
Sorry the the screen is very slow.
OK.
And hopefully you can see the text, but it's a it's an e-mail from.
I think it's your.
A course director.
This is Allison crook. Yes, sending an.
About the situation about the COVID situation.
Page and let's see.
OK.
And they're saying we're writing to, writing to you with an update about coronavirus and how it might affect you as a UCL student. And it specifically mentions that we know many of you are very concerned about your classes and assessment. And I suppose it's the general question is.
Did you provide feedback both at the time?
To lecturers or amongst students or.
Forums that you might have your student group forums and stuff. Did you sort of voice any concerns that you had in particular about?
How the teacher at the format of teaching was going to change as well as any restrictions on facilities that that might occur as a result of COVID.

Elyas Abaris   25:47
So I think for the first five years I was at UCL, they we had a feedback portal or where we could sort of send questions or concerns and things like that, that we wanted the medical school to address.
And I mean, I alongside many other students, sort of raised our concerns about this because we were all quite worried about sort of the content contents of the teaching.
And sort of the format of our exams and things like that.
Especially because the format of our exams wasn't confirmed until I think just a few weeks before our final exams. So I was definitely part of the majority who was voicing their concerns on that portal that we had.
Which I think they've now gotten rid of.
I imagine because we were too vocal.

   26:46
Yeah, yeah.
And were these, did you feel like they were being adequately addressed your your concerns?

Elyas Abaris   26:58
I The thing is, no, not really. I we've always thought that they were quite dismissive about our sort of worries and we'd often get people posting the same thing again and again and again because UCL would just sort of close the topic and say, yeah, an announcement will come soon. An announcement will come soon or we've already addressed this. The answer is not going to change or, you know, things in a similar vein.

   27:25
I see I.
Was there is the the forum that you mentioned? Is that different to the students complaints process?

Elyas Abaris   27:36
So it's specific to the medical school we had sort of our own feedback slash Question board.
The name I really can't remember. I trying to log into my UCL account to check.

   27:53
Do you still have access to that?

Elyas Abaris   27:55
My e-mail.

   27:58
Yeah. So all that the the feedback platform.

Elyas Abaris   28:01
No, because they've closed the platform down.

   28:05
Yes.

Elyas Abaris   28:07
Yeah.
I think they. Yeah, they.
Sorry.

   28:14
I just wondered, I mean it's you may be coming to this teacher, so I'm sorry if I'm taking things out of sequence, but there's another document I'm thinking of the mixed messages document mixed messages, e-mail.
Which I think that's.
Harsh so.
Yeah.
Yep.
So.
This is this is.
The 9th of June and this is from actually. This is from Marie Algan. I don't know if I'm pronouncing that correctly.

Elyas Abaris   28:55
Yeah.

   28:57
Sent on behalf of Doctor Morgan who's who at this stage. Maybe it's Marshall Morgan. I'm thinking of was the course director for the clinical sciences. And I know you've said that there's a bit of revolving door, of course directors, but at this stage it's this.

Elyas Abaris   29:10
Yes.

   29:11
And I was quite interested, she says. The issue that some very well, he must be really concerned about plans for next year, even the issues arising from the current pandemic.
And then I'm just interested in this sentence, really among others, but this one in particular. I'm also very aware of the mixed messages you're receiving from various quarters and the anxiety that this must be reducing. Now, I wondered whether this meant, and you may not recall specifically, but you may have some recollection.
Whether you were being told different things by different people at UCL about what to expect in terms of course delivery.
How long it would be that you'd have to put up with online tuition? What the position was on access to facilities because you know it's a little bit vague. This is, as in it's in that it sends mixed messages from various quarters. I don't really know what that means, but I'm inferring that it means various quarters within UCL, but.
This firstly does this particular document ring any bells? It may not, but but on the general question of whether you've been told one thing by one person that you see another thing by somebody else does that.
Was that your? Does that reflect your experience?

Elyas Abaris   30:21
I mean, yes, I'd say so, because UCL was sort of quite adamant that we would only have sort of this online teaching. There wouldn't be any sort of face to face experiences, but then we'd get the course director telling us that there's going to be set periods of face to face teaching with restrictions in place, but that she would be able to also get us time in the hospitals, which in the end didn't happen, although we did get some face to face teaching.
So that was quite a mixed bag.
Of information and I think at one point I did e-mail to sort of seek further clarification and I think I was just told to be patient.

   31:06
No idea. Not ideal. So and that must have been, I imagine, pretty confusing.
I mean one of.
The one.
Of the things we we hate as people is uncertainty and it sounds like this was just generating uncertainty because you didn't really know who to believe was that. Was that your experience of it? So you might have your votes boosted.
By one person.
And then dashed by another.
That is that fair description of the experience at the time.

Elyas Abaris   31:33
Yeah, I'd say so because especially when you've sort of finally gotten into the swing of things and sort of worked your way around the structure of the university only to be told that, oh, you might have this, you might have this, your course starts in, you know, a month. We still don't know how it's going to proceed. You know, it's not very helpful, especially when it's a completely different thing than what you've been used to for the past two years. It's completely.
It's not medicine anymore. It's, you know, clinical sciences. It's something different.
And you know, it's it's a big change and what you thought was going to be the case, especially when you picked it specifically because we had to pick our third year course I think in the second year and I'd pick clinical sciences specifically because it was going to be hands on, it was going to give me a chance to work on my clinical skills, the clinical skills that I hadn't been able to practise in seconds here.

   32:33
Yeah.

Elyas Abaris   32:33
The you know then.
Be met with such uncertainty and also in the end to not get a chance to practise those clinical skills at all. In the end, even though I picked clinical sciences.
It was supposed to be. Yeah, it was supposed to be the bridge between my second and 4th year.

   32:47
Yeah.
Helpful.
And.
Sort of going going back to the purely online format which.
You were being told.
It would. Your teaching would transition into.
I am going to slide back to this e-mail.
And it's just at the beginning of COVID in March 2020, and it talks specifically about GDC cancer lectures.
And.
It talks about how your lectures would now be delivered via Electro casts and they would use last year's lectures to deliver that content to you, I suppose. Did you find that?

Elyas Abaris   33:48
Yep.

   33:51
That.
What was being delivered those online modules on lecture casts were were they adequate? Did it sufficiently cover what you intended to learn for that year, or did you find them deficient?

Elyas Abaris   34:06
The thing is.
Any sort of gaps in knowledge didn't make themselves apparent until much later on, so I'd say until fourth year, because like they've mentioned, anything where it's not clear they wouldn't include in our final exam, meaning that it was sort of a terrible gauge of the actual level of your knowledge competitive compared to the curriculum. Meaning you know it sort of gave you this false sense of security.
Especially considering the exams were open book online 24 hour exams where even if you didn't know something you were completely allowed to just do your own research. It meant that, you know, in a fourth year after you've had this one year gap from medicine and it's just assumed that you have this scientific knowledge from first and 2nd year.
It does make things quite difficult and you realise that you didn't know some of the things you thought you knew because.
You know, it was just removed from the assessment because it was removed from Electro cost because it wasn't of good enough quality.

   35:15
I don't know if you appreciate that, but that's that's really interesting. So I think what you're saying is that the exam content was narrowed so as to conform with the content of lecture casts. I think that's the first point and the effect of that is.

Elyas Abaris   35:27
Yes.

   35:31
It's it's shutting off.
Or constraining the breadth of your learning and knowledge because it doesn't cover the entirety of the curriculum, but instead effectively.
It's sort of the tail way. The dog lecture cast determines what you're examined on, so that's. That's the first point. And then the second point. And I just wondered just for my own benefit, the Open book 24 Hour exam format that you mentioned.

Elyas Abaris   35:56
Yep.

   35:57
Was that it?
Was that a?
New approach. I mean, how had exams been conducted previously? What? What was it always done that way? But just with the broader curriculum or how did it work in the past?

Elyas Abaris   36:08
That was a completely new approach that they'd only told us about, I think less than a month before the exams, so we had no idea what we were preparing for up until that point and it was only done for us that year.
I think, yeah.

   36:25
I see.
And so it's effectively they're saying it. Here's the content. Here's the exam. We're putting it on a plate for you, you know, to sort of make up, if you like, for the fact that you've not had the tuition that you should have had. We've not had the experience is that is that it in a nutshell, is that what was going on in your view?

Elyas Abaris   36:44
I mean, yeah, absolutely. It was. I don't think anyone failed that exam. I think it was a free pass in sort of light of the fact that things were so difficult, which, you know at the time when I was in second year was appreciated. But you know, once you move on to sort of 4th year, fifth year, where anything that you've had in first and second year is never revisited and it's sort of the basis for clinical sciences later on you're sort of expected to have that base level knowledge and.
You don't and you realise that you've never actually identified what you do and what you don't know.
And you sort of realise that you have these gaps and you have to go back and revisit things that is now just assumed knowledge and that you're not really scheduled to have time to do.

   37:29
So it's denying you the opportunity to have built that foundation first time around, yeah.

Elyas Abaris   37:33
Yeah.

   37:36
That's very interesting. I mean this is because, you know, because part of the.
Part of the debate or the legal debate here is about.
What is it that you contracted for and what should you have had and UC LS?
Intention on this is very much well, all's well that ends well. I suppose I'll you might describe it in a sentence, but.
All that matters is that you've got your degree and our position and your position, of course, is well known. That's not what it's about, because this isn't the case. If I could arrive on day one, I've done nothing in four years, they've been handed a diploma. This is about the learning experience method of delivery. That's what. That's why I'm here. I'm not just here for a piece of paper.
I hope at the end of it I'll be in a position to get that piece of paper, but it.
Is.
Interesting. And it's really interesting to hear you talk about it first hand, how it was this sort of.
On a plate exam, I mean it's. It's fascinating. But anyway, just an observation.
And I think you mentioned as well, I think you sent an e-mail voicing your concerns about the mode of teaching at the time. And I think well, unless there's other emails.
I'm going to bring up e-mail on the screen that you sent in June 2020.

Elyas Abaris   38:59
Yes, this is one.

   39:01
And this is one of I think he sent a couple a couple at the time.

Elyas Abaris   39:05
Yep, and.

   39:09
Get to the beginning of the chain. Oh, no, I think, yeah, I think this is one of them.

Elyas Abaris   39:15
I mean, yeah. And then even from that point, I was worried specifically about the clinical skills and the ability to work in a lab.

   39:24
Yeah, yeah.
It's there in black and white, yes.
I think you also mentioned that that you and a lot of your friends were like that. There was a group of you and you were sort of in the same position you were all supposed.
Was it, was it fair to say that you're sort of anxious about what?
What your course might entail?
At what precise? How precisely it will be delivered, I don't know.
Were there discussions on were these your course friends? Their discussions that you had maybe on WhatsApp or were they friends that you had like, were there a few of you that were voicing these concerns at the time?

Elyas Abaris   40:17
I'm scrolling back on WhatsApp as we speak in our group chat to see if I I think off the top of my head. I do remember us talking about them being quite worried about it. I'm just trying to find it now to see if there's anything concrete.
Sorry it's taking a while.

   40:40
Don't worry if if you want alias we you can. You can maybe revisit that after we don't, we don't need to take your time up now. But if if you find you go back and look at it later there's there's interesting stuff by all means let us know we can we can find a way to to sort of to see that. But I don't want to. I don't want to hold you up that necessarily now.

Elyas Abaris   40:59
Sure.

   41:01
And repeat. He touched on it briefly a few moments ago about your optional choices.
I'm going to bring it up in an e-mail.
And.
Date the 17th of August.
And you can see what you wrote today. So I don't know if that drugs any memories for you. But you said I'm very sorry to disturb you. A lot of us are worried about the arrangements for next year regarding whether we need to be in London, our optional module selection.
When would be we be told?
This information.
And I suppose generally regarding your optional module choices, do you feel that?
They the choices themselves were more limited, both in terms of what UCL actually offered you at the time, so limited by UCL themselves. In light of the restrict COVID restrictions.
As well as whether your choice was any way determined or influenced by what might might be the best for you at the time. In light of those restrictions.

Elyas Abaris   42:29
So I think my choices for these optional modules.
Were, I think, based mostly on the assessment format, so bearing in mind that everything was going to be online and that we were going to have sort of a very restrictive teaching style.
So I think I picked things which I.
Thought would be.
Easier to do with such limited you know teaching.

   43:07
Do you know if you still actually restricted any practical modules as options because of COVID?

Elyas Abaris   43:16
So I so I wouldn't I I think off the top of my head, I can't remember, but I'm pretty sure some of the ones I picked definitely had a practical element to them.
Prior to COVID.
I think both of them had some sort of tight lab time involved prior to COVID.
And obviously this wasn't the case.

   43:44
I see.
And you say that your choices were more determined on the format of the assessment might take. Did you feel like it impacted?
Your.
The the restricted you know the online teaching and the mode of teaching.
If it wasn't for the online mode of teaching, do you think that you would have made different choices, different options?

Elyas Abaris   44:14
I think absolutely. I think I would have been, you know, more likely to pick something I'm genuinely interested in or something that gave me sort of more interesting, practical opportunities and things like that. But you know, with such restrict with like so many restrictions I just had to think practically.

   44:33
So you took a pragmatic approach. Just thought what's the best way to get through this as opposed to, you know, doing what I really want to do and then thriving and enjoying.

Elyas Abaris   44:35
Yeah.

   44:46
My experience here because because obviously the tissue probably will come up to this, but one of the elements of your claim is it is a is a damages for disappointment elements. It's clear to me from what you've said in the past, but also what you're saying now that there is a.
Huge gulf between the experience of your pre COVID experience and your expectation.
And what was delivered once COVID came into play in the Internet, the also online picture, if you like, and that is something that is something that we will develop when when doing first draught of your statement for you to consider. But that's that's very apparent.
And I just want to.
Take you to an e-mail. I think it's around the time of your visitation.
And matures.
Drawers.
20.
Yeah. So.
This is, I believe you've submitted.
Disruption survey, which is my understanding. It's just it's it's a form.
That you can submit to potentially request additional time to complete your project.

Elyas Abaris   46:21
Mm hmm.

   46:22
And you submitted it.
A March 2021, and I think this is going to the the lecturer that you or your supervisor that you identified.
If you kick a firm so you say your supervisor was away for a month due to personal reasons.
The final idea of what I'd be doing was not decided until he returned, and then you mentioned.
That you didn't start anything because you were waiting until they returned and confirmed that you would still be working.
On PNP 3 and what your project would actually entail, and he does not want to go.
Through the lab.

Elyas Abaris   47:12
Yep.

   47:13
Was this the particular lecture that you were referring to that was shielded at the time?

Elyas Abaris   47:19
Yes, it it, it's. Yeah. This is the same supervisor.

   47:25
OK. And and what actually happened after you submitted that did were you able to so you were able to access the lab with the PhD student that they allocated to you for a bit?

Elyas Abaris   47:40
So I so I think throughout my The thing is quite difficult because from the beginning the project was supposed to be heavily lab based and sort of everything that we'd prepared for was for it to be lab based. The briefing I'd received was that it was lab based and you know the results I was looking for were things that I'd only be able to get in lab.
The my supervisor was able to go in with me. I think a few times like you know.
I'd say maximum maximum sort of five times ever. I'd probably less, and I think I'd gone in once with a PhD student.
And I was left with, you know, data that didn't fully answer the questions that I had originally set out to answer and that my supervisor had sort of set up for me to answer. And when I was writing my dissertation, I had to sort of completely change the angle.
Of my project to fit the very limited lab work I had and sort of pad it with more library based things.
Even though that had never sort of been the original aim, and I never received any guidance around that.

   49:06
So if if it wasn't for the restrictive the the restrictions on the lab use your dissertation would have been very different.

Elyas Abaris   49:20
It it would have been completely different, yeah.
I yeah, 'cause I had to pad so much of my dissertation with library based things.
To have anything significant to speak about.

   49:35
I see. And just to clarify, the restrictions of the lab work, were they as a result of?
Universal COVID restrictions? Or was that just specifically in relation to the issues or or the the lack of supervision from your supervisor at the time because he was shielding was it? Was it a specific problem relating to?
To your situation, I suppose. Or was it a wider problem that you were able to access that time?

Elyas Abaris   50:06
I I think it's sort of a mixture of both. I think the fact that I mean COVID as a whole meant that the labs had sort of a lower capacity.
And there were less people there who would be able to offer guidance, you know, in case my supervisor couldn't make it. But also it was very difficult because my supervisor could hardly ever make it.

   50:33
Understood. Thanks.
I had a question about learning additional learning support, so it is said I'm going to find it, but it is said in UC LS defence.

Elyas Abaris   50:47
Mm hmm.

   50:58
Your play.
Paragraph 33 that they provided additional learning support and assistance to the claimant during 20/19/20 epidemic year, including on March the 20 March 2020 emailing students extending the date of a drug profile assignment by one week.
I mean, this is sort of if these are their plan points, they're they're not particularly impressive, but anyway there it is, doctor Shane Minogue arranging special access to electronic textbooks from 24 April when libraries were closed and the university amending its academic manual to provide the additional support.
And widen its degree classification borderlines to the advantage of students just taking those 1 by 1.
This emailing of students to extend the date of the drug profile assignment firstly, I mean you may not remember that does that. Does that ring any bells with you this is.
May 2020.

Elyas Abaris   51:52
I mean, yes, I, I I remember this quite this. I think this was in second year.

   51:57
Yeah.

Elyas Abaris   51:57
And I I don't think it was ever really a sort of a serious problem or something. I was worried about because it didn't doesn't count to anything. It never counted to anything. You didn't need to do well in it to pass. It was sort of just something formative.

   52:12
Yeah.

Elyas Abaris   52:13
For you to sort of do your own research on a drug and then they tell you, oh, OK, well, you're not very good at writing drug profiles, you know, do better next time. It never really mattered. It was never something I was worried about. So, you know, it was.
Sort of a gesture just.

   52:29
A suggestion for.
Which we won't afford them too much credit, yeah.

Elyas Abaris   52:30
Yeah, yeah.

   52:31
Absolutely. And then Dr Minogue arranging special access to electronic textbooks from 24th of April when the libraries were closed.
Any any recollection of that or any thoughts, comments on its impact or otherwise?

Elyas Abaris   52:47
I mean, again, this was all for second year in which we had completely open book Google of ALL exams. So it didn't really sort of have any impact on how I did in my assessment. And I don't think it makes up for sort of lack of, you know, proper lectures.
Because I'm I'm paying to attend lectures and paying to attend lab facilities, I'm not paying to have access to textbooks.

   53:17
Yeah, exactly, exactly.

Elyas Abaris   53:17
Xbox. Yeah.

   53:20
Understood. And then the last one which we.
Kind of touched.
On indirectly already is the the amendment of the university's academic manual to provide the additional support and widen widening of its degree classification borderlines to the advantage of students. I mean, I think what this means is.
You know, I suppose they made it easier if you'd like to get higher grades, but I mean, this goes back to, I think the point you were making before, which is you're not there just to get a piece of paper, you're there to get the university experience that you expected signed up for and have paid for, so.
Query how much credit they should be given for doing this. I mean, it seems to me as I say that that seems to me to be what you what your view of this is. Is that fair?

Elyas Abaris   54:01
I mean, yeah, absolutely. Because when I'm, you know, working as a doctor and I'm on the wards, I'm not going to be grateful that I got an easy ride. I'm going to be grateful that I have the skills and the knowledge to, you know, save my patients lives.

   54:15
Very well. Very well put. Yeah, I think that's that's the response.
And then in terms of the library, I mean, I'll go through these for what it's worth. But they they say that their library services put in place a web page which was updated daily with information about online library support, I mean.
Return returns of books on loan were extended and fines were waived. Any of this having an impact on you or jogging memories or any thoughts on this?

Elyas Abaris   54:43
Not particularly. I'm not a very textbook person. I don't. I don't think I've any point you use textbooks to supplement my knowledge. I. Yeah, that was never my style of studying, and it never really helped me out.

   54:59
Understood. But I think it and.
Say online skills. Sorry, go ahead.

Elyas Abaris   55:04
I think.
Sorry, I think just relevant to the bit before about the widening. The thing for the classifications.

   55:15
Yeah.

Elyas Abaris   55:15
Medicine is an unclassified degree to begin with.
So it never really mattered. The only year where it mattered was the 3rd year, which was the year out of medicine.
And even then I think I.
My grade was high enough that it wouldn't have mattered and that I wasn't impacted by it.

   55:38
I see.

Elyas Abaris   55:38
But the.
The thing is, UCL seems to claim that because I did well in the end because I achieved the first in the end that they did a good job. But the thing like the reason why I got a first is because I had to work that much harder and I succeeded in working that much harder. Not because they lowered the grade boundaries, which I wasn't affected by at all.

   56:00
Yes.
That's interesting. So just if I can just dig into that a little bit further, is your point that, let's say, I mean I don't know how much they shifted the boundaries by, but I think your point is that your marks were so high that if they shifted them by tempers, I don't know what it was.
Then it wouldn't have made any difference to you because you had you've.
Got.
A high first. So even if they've knocked it down, by how many percent you still would have got.
A.
First do do you know do you know what the specifics were in terms of battery? You got a sense of that, yes.

Elyas Abaris   56:32
I think I think it was no point. I think they had a null .5% leeway. So I think if you'd gotten 69.5% and above, whereas before that would be a second class.
They they would bump that up to a first class, so you know, it was a very minimal difference. And since I'd gotten above 70 anyway, it wouldn't have affected me at all.

   56:52
Now.
Well, that makes.
Sense. OK, so that is quite a marginal change.
OK. I'm just wondering if I I mean.
There's one other point that I'll raise just for completeness, although it seems a bit petty on their part. 1 of the points they make, which is really something for us to address in legal submissions, is that even effectively, even if facilities have been available, you were not ready, willing and able to.
The teachers can.
Ask you some questions.
About residence, but I had a very quick basic question, which is.
They say of you that you are not ready, willing and able to attend in person tuition or to physically access relevant facilities.
It would not have done so, in particular when you were unavailable because you had to attend an orthodontist appointment. That's right, it's only 3rd of October 2020, which is just really again, these. These are that sort of Plumb points.
What did you?
I mean, I don't want to say it. Did you have an appointment that day? Is it doesn't seem very material to me say, to argue that you missed one session. If you did. I mean, I don't have to.
Say they've obviously found an e-mail in which you say I, yeah.

Elyas Abaris   58:00
I mean, I think it, yeah.
I mean, yeah, it's it is absolutely ridiculous. 'cause. I attended every other face to face session. I had to leave for I think I one hour early like in a 7 hour day to yeah attend an emergency orthodontist appointment because I think my gums were bleeding or something. And apparently that meant that I didn't care enough to attend in person teaching.

   58:22
Thanks.
Right. That's right. Here it is. Paragraph 52.1 going to be the centre point of the case.

Elyas Abaris   58:30
Yeah.

   58:34
Yes, but OK, I think I think actually make sure that people.
I think those attuned to Tisha, that's what I had.
Just got a couple of specific points to offer. I didn't. The first one is generally about how often.
You were on UC LS website checking for updates like one of the points that they made with is that we publish all the coronavirus FAQs and the latest COVID information on the website for the student.
To look at.
So it was there and it was there, you know, it was possibility to to, to read about it.
Did you regularly check their?
Website Or, you know, were they more? Were you relying on more contact from them?

Elyas Abaris   59:30
So the The thing is, is the medical school is a completely separate entity to, you know, the rest of the university. Things operate differently in the medical school to the entire rest of the university. So some things that may have been relevant for the rest of the university were not relevant to us. And so we were relying solely on information that we received from the medical school.
And so yes, they would upload that to Moodle, but we wouldn't have to check it every day because whenever an update was posted.
We'd get it through to our emails anyway, so it's not something that I'd have to regularly do because it would come to my e-mail anyway and I'd only check if I wanted to, you know, cross check a rule or something like that.

   1:00:16
Helpful and completely understood.
And just another discrete point that UCL make in their defence, which I think is, you know, if if I put myself in your shoes, I think it's ridiculous. But they asked, well, they said at any point you could have stopped or halted your course.
You know, if you weren't satisfied with the teaching.
Or the mode of teaching or the facilities, etcetera.
Did you ever consider?
Faulting or stopping your corpse at any point because of, you know, the circumstances that you faced during your course.

Elyas Abaris   1:00:59
I mean.
Not at all. And for a variety of reasons, I think the main being financial burden, you know, I'd I'd already paid. I'd already signed a contract to live in London for the entire year. My student loan had already gone out for that year. The entire time I was at university, I was working multiple part time jobs to sort of support me through it, and I applied every single year for the UCL bursary.
And I think the financial constraints alone made it very difficult and the fact that you know that would be a year of student loan used up that I wouldn't be able to have if I apply to a different university.
Just made it ridiculous because I think by that point I would have been in 3rd year and that's sort of at least two years gone of my student loan that I'd have to self fund if I went anywhere else, which would have been impossible.
And I think other than that, I'd the fact that if I went somewhere else, you can't just transfer degrees. I'd have to start again from the beginning. I'd have to go through the lengthy application process again. I'd have to go through interviews. You know, it's just not. It's completely impractical. And I think it's just not realistic at all.

   1:02:15
Yeah, I mean just just for some context, the the reason you see how pushing this point is because of the terms of their contract and what what there is a debate about the extent of your rights as a party contracting with UCL is.
The right you have if you are dissatisfied is a right to terminate effectively.
And exit the courts. But of course.
We will say and then they know full well that somebody in your position as you've just described it, I don't need to repeat it.
It is never going to do that and it's not in a position to do that. So it is an unrealistic proposition, but that's that's the background, that's why it's been. That's why it speaks to just.

Elyas Abaris   1:02:55
Yeah.

   1:03:00
Thank you. And something there, Adam mentioned earlier that we touched on was regarding your claim.
In distress and disappointment, and I know.
The EU briefly mentioned that in some of the previous in the previous interview, but at a high level, what was particularly what was the most disappointing or distressing elements to the teaching moving online.

Elyas Abaris   1:03:34
I think.
I mean it differs year by year, but I think.
The I think I've already touched upon the fact that in second year the fact that everything moved online, the fact that the assessments were so different, although they didn't have an impact at the time they made my life much harder in fourth year where you know everything is assumed knowledge and.
You know, you realise you don't know what you thought you knew and you're having to play catch up and there's already so much to learn of. Just.
And to have to go back and learn what you and UCL both assumed you already knew. You know it's it's it's extremely stressful because you barely have been enough time to cover the actual 14 material to begin with.
And.

   1:04:27
Yeah, that's interesting point. And I imagine that's on top of the sort of contemporaneous distress and disappointment that you're feeling by virtue of the fact that your degree has been turned upside down and you're not getting.
What you thought?
You were going to get and everything that you'd expected and maybe become used to some extent first.
Year or so went out of the window and that I'm assuming you tell me if I'm wrong, that that innovates in, in and of itself gave rise to stress uncertainty at this point.
That'd be fair to say.

Elyas Abaris   1:04:59
Yeah, it's absolutely. I mean, you know, all these decisions I made early on were supposed to set me up for the later years. You know, my choice of clinical sciences, my sort of desire to, you know, practise all these practical skills, which in the end I didn't get the ability to do, which ended up, you know, hurting me in my 4th year exams.
And.
I mean, yeah.
I mean UCL.

   1:05:26
Sorry, some of these questions seem obvious, but it's just we just want to cover the ground.

Elyas Abaris   1:05:31
And there, that's fine. I mean, UCL claims to that. I've never sort of voiced any concerns or anything like that. But I think in my 4th year exams, I sort of I think even before the 4th year exams, I think part way through my 4th year I'd made it aware to one of my supervisors that I was sort of, you know dealing with a new diagnosis of anxiety.
You know, as a result of the situation's going on and she sort of reached out to student support to contact me about it.
And in the end, when I did end up having to retake my exams, I reached out to student support again about sort of getting extra measures in place that, you know, support with that which in the end I think equated to asking examiners in practical exams just to be nicer.
Was, I think what I got from that, I think.
But you know, I did make it clear to UCL that, you know.
That things weren't OK, and so, you know, their claim that I'd never sort of voiced anything, just not correct.

   1:06:41
Yeah, understood.
And it's it's a, it's a brief point, but.
UCL.
They have taken a point.
Against all most, if not all, of the tests claim it's in relation to their residency.

Elyas Abaris   1:07:06
Mm hmm.

   1:07:08
And I know that you have very kindly you sent over your tenancy agreements, I believe, but were there, were there any periods generally when?

Elyas Abaris   1:07:13
Yep.

   1:07:19
You weren't in London or you were sort of away from an extended period, and I'm thinking maybe.
After 2000, between 2019 two 1020.
To 22, can you think of a recall? Any large gaps at all where you may not have been in?

Elyas Abaris   1:07:40
I mean, no, my family live in London. I sort of had no realistic reason to leave. You know, I I had my accommodation paid for, you know, it's it's the school year. We're not going anywhere because of COVID. Anyway, there's nowhere to go on holiday to.
I was obviously going to stay in the fact that I was paying a lot of money for.
You know to be ready and willing to attend face to face teaching.

   1:08:09
Yeah, absolutely. So, so, so your family home was in, in, in London and but you were renting a flat.

Elyas Abaris   1:08:13
Yep.

   1:08:17
While you were staying, I mean, were they close to each other or were?
They.
In different parts of London, your.

Elyas Abaris   1:08:20
And no. So all the yeah. So all the of the flats that I rented were sort of in the region surrounding UCL within, I'd say a 20 minute walk. Whereas if I was staying with my family, it'd be sort of it'd take me over an maybe an hour to get in.

   1:08:36
OK.

Elyas Abaris   1:08:37
And I mean other than that, it'd be the fact that sort of I had younger siblings at home and it wouldn't be conducive to sort of any sort of studying.

   1:08:44
I understood so. So so your property, the property that you're renting with central London and your family home was sort of more further out zone fours and something like that. Or was it? Yeah, got it.

Elyas Abaris   1:08:55
Yep.

   1:09:02
Perfect. Just.
Finally, you're ground up.
I don't know whether you can something that we what we had in mind if there was somebody appropriate.
Was.
If you knew of anybody who you voiced it this your experiences to at the time, or somebody who might want to potentially come and essentially.
Confirm your experiences and.
A test to essentially your story.
I don't know if you can think of anybody in mind that you've sort of had close contact with.
That you shared your experiences with that might be beneficial to bringing in as a witness.

Elyas Abaris   1:09:54
It's it's quite difficult because we've all sort of gone separate ways after graduation and I can't think of anyone off the top of my head that I'm still in contact with who, who would be able to do that. I mean, obviously, I've voiced my sort of concerns to my parents, but.
You know I'm. I'm.

   1:10:13
You know it's it's. Yeah, I understand. It's not. This isn't this isn't essential. It's really, you know, in some cases we might have run a situation to where somebody has a roommate, that they're with the whole time or a fellow student or whoever it may be who has sort of shared experiences. But. But, you know, if.
Something subsequently occurs to you, then let us know, but it's not. It's not an essential requirement. Don't worry.
OK. Anything else?
I think we covered.
OK. Well, Alice, thank thank you very much for giving us that time, I think.
What we will do now?
Is we'll go away, digest what you've said and we will endeav to turn it into an initial draught statement.
As I say, inevitably there will be, there will be following questions we have for your points of detail that we'd like just to to give. I say as as I said, to give the state of flavour more character. We don't want it to be bare bones. We want it to be really an opportunity for you to give your account of your experience.
But you know we are. We are sorry that this this turned out to be part of your your student experience, because it's just shouldn't have happened this way.
But if you leave it with us and then we can contact you, I think you normally contact via e-mail. Yeah, if you don't mind us bugging you a little bit more over the next couple of weeks, that would be much appreciated. We won't encroach any more than necessary, but we want, as I said, we want to get this right. I'm sure you do as well.
But before we sign off, do you have any questions for us? Anything. Any concerns? Any queries?

Elyas Abaris   1:12:00
No, no, I think it's all. It's been quite clear and I understand where this is going.

   1:12:06
Yeah.
Brilliant. OK, well, if anything does occur, you can always e-mail us and we will get back to you as soon as we can. But in the meantime, take care. We will be in touch soon and thanks again.

Elyas Abaris   1:12:15
Alright, perfect. Thank you so much. Have a lovely day.
Right.
Bye.

   1:12:23
Bye.