1 
 7th Respondent  
Adam Zoubir  
20h Witness Statement  
Exhibit AKZ 20 
31 October  2024  
 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE   Claim No. CL -2017-000323  
BUSINESS AND PROPERTY COURTS  
OF ENGLAND & WALES  
COMMERCIAL COURT (QBD)  
 
IN THE MATTER OF GERALD MARTIN SMITH  
AND IN THE MATTER OF THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE ACT 1988  
 
B E T W E E N :  
(1)  THE SERIOUS FRAUD OFFICE  
(2)  MR JOHN MILSOM AND MR DAVID STANDISH  
(as joint Enforcement Receivers in respect of the realisable property of Gerald Martin Smith)  
Applicants  
- and  
 
(1) LITIGATION CAPITAL LIMITED  
(a company incorporated in the Marshall Islands)  
& Others  
  Respondents  
 
 
20th WITNESS STATEMENT OF ADAM KARIM ZOUBIR  
 
 
I, ADAM KARIM ZOUBIR , of Harcus Parker Limited, 7th Floor, Melbourne House, 44 -46 
Aldwych, London, WC2B 4LL, DO SAY AS FOLLOWS : 
A. Introduction  
1 I am a partner in the firm of Harcus Parker Limited, which has conduct of this matter on 
behalf of Harbour Fund II , L.P. (“Harbour ”).  This is my 20thth witness statement in this 
action (the “ Proceedings ”) and is made  following the conclusion of the trial  pursuant to 
which Mr Justice Foxton rendered his judgment on 18 May 2021 (the “ Directed Trial 
Judgment ”)1 and subsequent Consequentials Order dated 11 June 2021 (the 
“Consequentials Order ”) (pages  1-20).  
 
1 The Serious Fraud Office & Anor v Litigation Capital Ltd & Ors [2021] EWHC 1272 (Comm) (18 May 2021) 
(bailii.org)  
2 
 2 Insofar as the contents of this witness statement are within my own knowledge they are 
true and , insofar as they are based on things I have read or which  have been told to me by 
others, they are true to the best of my information and belief (the source of such 
information and belief being identified below).   
3 Nothing I say in this witness statement constitutes, or is intended to constitute, a waiver 
of Harbour’s legal professional privilege  or that of the Settlement Parties (as hereinafter 
defined) .   
4 There is now shown to me a bundle of paginated documents marked AKZ -20 containing 
true cop ies of the documents to which I refer herein.  
5 I make this statement in support of Harbour’s application for various relief as set out in 
draft order provided with the application. In summary, Harbour seeks : 
5.1 An order or declaration to the effect that Dr Cochrane is not permitted to seek to 
challenge the outcome of the Directed Trial (to include the Court’s findings in 
relation to the ownership of Orb, and its conclusions concerning Harbour’s 
entitlements based  on its Investment Agreement), by reason of her signing the 
LCL Settlement Agreement  as well as a deed  dated 23 October 20142 (the “ 2014 
Harbour Deed ”) (pages 21 – 31)  (addressed further below);  
5.2 An order or declaration to the effect that any attempt now made (whether by Dr 
Cochrane, Mr Thomas or anyone else) to raise arguments challenging Harbour’s 
entitlements as found in the Directed Trial, or otherwise seeking to disturb the 
outcome of the Directed Trial, is an abuse of process or otherwise barred by 
doctrines of estoppel or similar principles , or is time barred , including  (in the case 
of Dr Cochrane and Mr Thomas ) estoppe l by the terms of  the Harbour Deed );  
5.3 An order or declaration rejecting any argument to the effect that the Harbour IA 
is unenforceable by reason of the decision of the  Supreme Court in R (on the 
application of PACCAR Inc and others (Appellants) v Competition Appeal 
Tribunal and others (Respondents) [2023] UKSC 28  (the “ PACCAR Decision ”), 
or in the alternative that it is only unenforceable in part ;  
 
2 The Harbour 2014 Deed was signed by or on behalf of the following parties between October 2014 and December 
2014. The final signatory to the deed was Stewarts who signed at the end of January 2015.  
3 
 5.4 Further and  other directions as may be appropriate in order that this matter may 
be case managed appropriately  and/or ; 
5.5 Such further or other relief as is appropriate.  
6 This application has been necessitated by the actions and conduct of the now thrice -
convicted fraudster, Dr Gerald Smith  (“Dr Smith ”), and parties and entities closely 
associated with him , including  but not limited to  his ex -wife, Dr Gail Cochrane (“ Dr 
Cochrane ”) and Messrs Nicholas Thomas and Roger Taylor ( “Messrs Thomas and 
Taylor ”)3, (together “ the Smith Parties ”.)  
7 It has become apparent over time that these parties will , regrettably,  stop at nothing to 
frustrate the effect of the Directed Trial Judgment and Consequentials  Order , whether via 
the pursuit of meritless litigation  before this Court , the making of false allegations against 
the Settlement Parties in correspondence,  the participation  in and prolongation of related 
disputes in foreign jurisdictions or the direct obstruction of the authorised acts of court -
appointed office holders  whose role is to manage, realise and distribute assets .  
8 The PACCAR Decision represents the latest hook upon which the Smith Parties seek to 
hang a n attempt to prevent the Directed Trial Judgment and Consequentials Order taking 
effect.  
9 Specifically, i n the case of Dr Cochrane , she has argued before the Royal Court of Jersey 
(the “ Jersey Court ”), in the context of an application dated  21 November 2023  to recall 
her personal désastre  as well as that of Orb a.r.l (“ Orb”) (i.e. her bankruptcy and its 
insolvency, respectively) , that the rights of Harbour and others which were established at 
the Directed Trial shou ld be disregarded  by the Jersey Court  (the “ Jersey Recall 
Applications ”). 
10 In summary (as I will explain further below ), the Jersey Recall Applications  are ostensibly 
premised on the effect of  Dr Cochrane’s contention , albeit not fully articulated  at this 
stage, that “By operation of section 58AA of the UK Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 and the 
 
3 It appears that Mr T aylor has had little or no direct involvement in these proceedings  since the Directed Trial. While 
Mr Thomas has often corresponded with Harbour and the other Settlement Parties  on behalf of himself and Mr 
Taylor , I understand that Mr Taylor may no longer be involved in this matter on a day to day basis.  Notably, as I 
explain further below, Mr Thomas has recently caused a letter before action to be sent to Harbour  and has instructed 
solicitors in his sole name.  
4 
 Damages Based Agreements Regulation (SI 2013/609), the Harbour IA was at all material times and 
is unenforceable .”4 
11 By the Jersey Recall Application s, Dr Cochrane effectively seeks to cancel or unwind her 
bankruptcy  and the insolvency of Orb .  
12 However, Harbour believes that the natural jurisdiction for the determination of 
arguments  connected  to the Directed Trial  and the potential impact of the PACCAR 
Decision on the Directed Trial Judgment and Consequentials Order is England and Wales,  
given that they relate in large part to the validity and enforceability of  existing findings 
made by the English Court, including in relation to  the funding agreement entered into 
between Harbour  and Messrs Thomas and Taylor  and Or b (the “ Orb Claimants ”) on 10 
July 2013 (the “ Harbour IA ”) (pages  32-86) and other  matters with which this Court is 
familiar . As such, Harbour has sought a stay of the Jersey Recall Application s pending the 
determination of this Application5.  
13 In response to its stay application , pursuant to a hearing on 25 June 2024 the Royal Court 
of Jersey directed Harbour to inter alia  produce to it a draft of th is Application by 2 August 
2024, which it did.  A hearing is listed on 12 November 2024 before the Jersey Court to 
determine Harbour’s stay application , but in the meantime Harbour considers it 
appropriate to proceed as intended, now that its interactions with Mr Thomas (set out 
below) appear to have reached their natural conclusion in terms of their usefulness . 
14 In addition to (and I believe  in connection with) the Jersey Recall Applications, on 11 July 
2024 Harbour received a letter before action from Marriot Harrison  LLP, instructed by 
Mr Thomas  (the “ Thomas  Letter  Before Action ”) (pages  87-106). According to the 
Thomas  Letter  Before Action , Mr Thomas now intends  to challenge the validity of the 
Harbour IA in the English Courts, on the basis of the PACCAR Decision.  
15 Correspondence has passed between Marriott Harrison and my firm since my firm’s 
receipt of the Thomas Letter Before Action  (pages  107-145), regarding appropriate pre -
action steps and the applicability of the 31 March 2023 Order of Foxton J , which required 
Messrs Thomas and Taylor to provide evidence regarding their source of funding for any 
 
4 Paragraph 7 of Dr Cochrane’s A mended Representation  (page  978) 
5 Harbour had originally intended to seek a stay in reliance upon the passage through Parliament of the Litigation 
Funding (Enforceability) Bill, which had been expected to pass into law this year and cure with retrospective effect 
any PACCAR issues, but did not as a result of the calling of the election on 4 July 2024.  
5 
 further application of claim against the Settlement Parties, along with disclosing any 
involvement of Dr Smith or related parties as well as satisfying their considerable 
outstanding costs orders in favour of the Settlement Parties, before any such applica tion 
or claim would be allowed to proceed (the " Debarring/Stay Directions ").  
16 For context, I note that Mr Thomas’ potential action has been threatened  obliquely  for 
many months  and was referred to by counsel for Dr Cochrane at the Convening Hearing  
that took place on 6 February 2024  in respect of the Jersey Recall Applications  (a note of 
the hearing , prepared by Harbour’s Jersey lawyers, Bedell Cristin, is at pages  146-156). The 
cooperation between M r Thomas  and Dr Cochrane (doubtless both under the direction 
of and in conjunction with  Dr Smith) is apparent both from this reference and the Thomas  
Letter  Before Action , which expressly refers to the Jersey Recall Applications , 
notwithstanding the fact that he is not ostensibly involved in th e Jersey  proceedings .6  
17 As indicated above, m y firm  has exchanged  correspond ence with Marriott Harrison  with 
a view to narrowing  the issues between our respective clients . This has included our  
provi sion to  them of a draft of this application  as filed with the Jersey Court  on 2 August 
2024  (including a draft of this witness statement, albeit that it has since been further 
developed  in some respects ). Despite this, it has unfortunately  not been possible for the 
parties to narrow their differences , with the parties’ positions being  diametrically  opposed . 
As part of this correspondence , we have repeatedly invited Mr Thomas to set out in detail  
the consequences of the relief he intends to seek  – in other words  – what the effect would 
be on the findings made in the Directed Trial Judgment as reflected in the Consequentials 
Order  of an order declaring the Harbour IA to be unenforceable . This is an important 
point in circumstances where Mr Thomas’ own case at the Directed Trial was advanced 
on the basis of proprietary rights he asserted as having arise n under the Harbour Trust , 
and he advanced no alternative proprietary claim. In their letter dated 25 September 2024, 
Marriott Harrison have said that the effect of their client’s application succeeding would 
be that Harbour would not be entitled to any part of the assets listed in paragraph 4 of the 
Consequential s Order and their beneficial owners would be the Orb Claimants. No 
 
6 I note that in an affidavit served by Dr Cochrane  on 24 September 2024  in support of the  Jersey Recall Applications, 
Dr Cochrane stated “while I am aware of other proceedings being taken in respect of the illegality  issue and other matters, I am not 
acting in concert with any others ”. Unfortunately, given my and my client’s extensive experience in these proceedings, I do 
not accept that either this Court or the Jersey Court can take this suggestion at face value . 
6 
 detailed analysis  has been provi ded of how this alleged beneficial interest arises  or its 
interaction with  third party proprietary claims advanced at the Directed Trial . 
18 Mr Thomas has also sought to argue that the terms of the Debarring /Stay Directions did 
not reflect the Court’s ruling  of 31  March 2023  and has sought to question the way in 
which the draft order  was finalised, despite having been copied on all relevant 
correspondence with the Court regarding the same , and his comments on the draft having 
been provided to the Court . In particular, he suggests via Marriott Harrison that  the 
Court’s only intenti on was that he should be required to pay outstanding costs orders in 
order to pursue any claim or application against the Settlement Parties.  
19 In terms of the position in relation to the outstanding costs orders, Mr Thomas has settled  
the outstanding costs payments to Harbour due under paragraph 25 of the costs  Order of 
21 October 2021 , paragraph 3 of the costs order of 8 July 20227and paragraph 8 of the 
costs  order of 24 March 2023.  The final costs order was settled by Mr Thomas on 22 
October 2024.  
20 However, Harbour considers  it to be  clear that , given the content of Harbour’s  application 
for a debarring order and the Court’s previous experience of Mr Thomas’ conduct in the 
Part 8 Proceedings  and the revelations  as to the funding of that matter , the Court i ntended 
what its order requires, i.e. that Mr Thomas should also provide evidence of both (a) the 
source of funding for any further claim or application and (b) the involvement of Dr Smith 
and Mr McNally , or any persons Mr Thomas knows  the be associated with them . The 
Debarring/Stay Directions accordingly accurately reflect the Court’s intention . Harbour’s 
position, which m y firm  has conveyed to  Mr Thomas ’s solicitors  is that  the terms of the 
Debarring/Stay Directions will apply in the event that Mr Thomas files his threatened 
 
7 My understanding, derived from discussions with Stewarts (privilege in relation to which is not waived) is that Messrs 
Thomas and Taylor were able to make this payment pursuant to a settlement reached with St Paul ’s Solicitors  (in 
liquidation)  (“St Paul ’s”), a firm instructed by them on various occasions in these proceedings , and previous ly run by  
Mr Andrew Crossley . My understanding is that on 16 May 2023,  Messrs Thomas and Taylor filed a professional 
negligence claim against St Pauls  (the “ St Paul’s Claim ”), due to the failure by St Paul ’s to serve the particulars of 
claim in separate proceedings against Stewarts  which were consequently dismissed by the court . Ultimately, St Paul ’s 
insurer settled  the claim . In the interim, as the Court is aware, Stewarts Law filed a third party debt order  application  
(“TPDO  Application ”) in respect of the settlement monies  . On 9 July 2024 , the TPDO  Application  was dismissed 
by consent , on terms that provided for  (inter alia)  significant payments to the funder and ATE providers in respect of 
Messrs Thomas  and Taylor ’s negligence claim, a firm of solicitors, as well as payments in respect of Messrs Thomas 
and Taylor’s outstanding costs obligations.  The relevant consent order (“ TPDO Consent Order ”) is at pages 157 -
159. While I am not aware of the full background to the St Paul ’s Claim, I note that St Paul’s appear s to have accepted 
that it breached the duties it owed to Messrs Thomas and Taylor  relatively soon after the negligence action  was 
commenced . Mr Crossley is currently a consultant at another firm, Taylor Rose . I understand that  while at Tay lor 
Rose, Mr Crossley acted for  Ms Dawna  Stickler in matters related to these proceedings.   
7 
 application  first, makes  a cross -application in response to this Application, or otherwise 
seeks any relief in response to Harbour’s Application .  
21 Accordingly, r egardless of whether Mr Thomas has satisfied the costs orders referred to 
above , it remains  Harbour’s position that Mr Thomas must satisfy the remaining 
provisions of the Debarring/Stay Directions  before he is able actively to do anything else. 
The Debarring/Stay Directions were made  in light of Mr Thomas’s repeated efforts to 
obstruct the Settlement Parties ’ efforts to enforce their rights pursuant to the Directed 
Trial, with support and funding  provided by Dr Smith and his associates , and ul timately in 
those parties’ interests . 
22 In light of all of the above , Harbour  seeks, by this Application, to achieve a (further) 
confirmation  of finality in terms of the status of the Directed Trial Judgment and related 
orders  and the Harbour IA , such that the Smith Parties are precluded , to the greatest extent 
possible, from continuing to interfere with the judicial findings of this Court  with the result 
that the realisation process can continue unimpeded . Harbour is aware that to the extent 
that it is required to go beyond questions of whether Mr Thomas or Dr Cochrane are shut 
out from re -opening argument, this Application may engage the interests of other parties 
to the se proceedings . Given the lack of clarity provided by Mar riott Harrison in respect of 
Mr Thomas’s intended  course of  action, other parties may argue that, should Mr Thomas 
succeed, this could potentially re -engage those other parties’ interests  in the assets which 
were the subject of the Directed Trial.  
23 As such, if Mr Thomas complies with all the provisions of the Debarring/Stay Directions 
and this Application is subsequently opposed by Mr Thomas, these type of extremely 
complex follow -on issues (as well as alternative arguments potentially available to Harbour 
to sustain its rights) mean that the overriding objective is likely to be best served by case 
managing issues of principle to be resolved at  a first stage, and only if: (a) arguments based 
on the PACCAR Decision are open to Mr Thomas (and Dr Cochran e); and (b) are 
successful, to then convene a second stage which can take account of these broader 
questions . Harbour intends to make more detailed case management proposals in this 
regard once the initial round of evidence has been exchanged  in response to this 
Application.   
24 I should note that Harbour presents this application to this Court, because this Court has 
substantial familiarity with the underlying history and plainly has an interest in seeing its 
8 
 existing findings and conclusions respected. In addition, the agreements  that are  the subject 
of the relevant disputes are governed by English law and  contain  jurisdiction clauses in 
favour of the English Courts. It appears, from the Thomas  Letter  Before Action , that Mr 
Thomas also envisages bringing his challenge before this Court. However , I note for 
completeness that the Court’s view may be  that although the English Courts are competent 
and best placed to hear these issues, some of the arguments being co ntemplated by Mr 
Thomas can only be (or are most appropriately) pursued by way of application for 
permission to appeal the outcome of the Directed Trial  to the Court of Appeal , albeit long 
out of time , rather than to the first instance Court .  
25 Indeed, I note in this regard that on 28 September 2023, Mr Thomas wrote to Harbour 
(on an open basis) enclosing a draft appellant’s notice . Mr Thomas  stated in the 
accompanying letter (marked “Urgent and Immediate ”) that his intention was to “appeal 
against the Directed Trial Judgement  of Foxton J. (in particular various terms of the 11 June 
Consequentials Order, the 14 December 2022 Tru st and Receivership Orders, and the 31 March 2023 
Directions (Debarring/Stay application order) ” (pages  160-172). Mr Thom as acknowledged that 
the proposed appeal was out of time, and sought Harbour’s consent to its terms . 
26 My firm responded on 29 September  2023 , noting that Mr Thomas’s letter was not 
accompan ied by grounds of appeal , skeleton argument, any evidence in support o r draft 
orders  (pages  173-174). In fact , it set out no grounds at all for the proposed appeal.  Our 
email stated that we would consider the substance of the application  when such materials 
were provided. Mr Thomas  provided no such further materials .  
27 I note that Mr Thomas , nine months after his intimated  appeal  to the Court of Appeal , 
appears to have  decided to take a different approach , instead propos ing to ap ply to th is 
Court . 
28 At this point, as noted above, the precise form of relief sought by Mr Thomas is not 
entirely clear.  The Thomas Letter Before Action  concludes that Harbour is “ not entitled to 
any sums from the Proceeds pursuant to the Harbour IA and all of the assets held pursuant to the Harbour 
Trust are to be released to the funded parties in their appropriate proportions .” and that “Appropriate 
consequential steps will follow in respect of the assets currently held pursuant to the Harbour Trust, which 
we would also seek to agree with you without the need for litigation .”. When my firm p ressed for 
further details of Mr Thomas’s intended relief, Marriott Harrison responded that :  
9 
 “1. It is perfectly clear  that if our client succeeds in  demonstrating that  the Harbour  IA (or  any specific 
DBA part of it)  is unenforceable:  
(i) Harbour will not be entitled to any part of the assets listed in paragraph 4 of the Consequentials Order 
(and we note that you do not argue to the contrary); and  
(ii) their beneficial owners would be the Orb Claimants  (in their appropriate proportions)  as the claimants 
in the claim of which these assets are the proceeds. ” 
29 It is therefore not entirely clear what the appropriate procedural route for such relief 
sought by Mr Thomas  might be , and it is obviously an incomplete analysis, because if Mr 
Thomas’ rights under the Harbour IA (which were themselves established at the Directed 
Trial) fall away, he does not articulate how he would nevertheless establish his entitlement 
to any relevant a ssets. Despite this, and w hilst it will be a matter primarily for submissions , 
I would respectfully suggest that  at least some of the reli ef sought by way of this 
Application can properly be sought from the first instance Court – by way of example, this 
Court can rule on the request for relief concerning Dr Cochrane and the LCL Settlement 
Agreement  (which we expand upon at paragraph  84-97 below) , and this Court can also, 
for example, confirm the present validity of its existing findings so far as it is concerned – 
without trespassing on any matters which might fall within the appellate jurisdiction. 
Further, the time for pursuing any appeal o f the Directed Trial outcome has long since 
passed, and indeed the PACCAR Decision is no longer recent  (having been handed down 
over a year ago) , such that it is very difficult to see on what basis any prospective appellant 
could seek permission to appeal out of time from the Court of Appeal in any event .   
30 It is also not clear what Mr Taylor’s position is on Mr Thomas’s intended relief, or whether  
he is even aware of this matter. Harbour will serve a copy of this Application on Mr Taylor 
and invite him to confirm his position in advance of any hearing.  
31 Harbour’s position in respect of the relief sought by Mr Thomas  is necessarily reserved, 
pending compliance with the Debarring/ Stay Directions  and clarification of the precise 
approach taken by him in this litigation, and the basis for that approach. However, 
Harbour does invite this Court to make such orders as are within its jurisdiction to confirm 
the final nature of the findings and orders it has made, so as to deal as fully as possible 
with the  recent challenges which have been intimated.   
B. Executive Summary of the basis of the relief sought by Harbour  
10 
 32 In accordance with its obligations under the Harbour IA, Harbour provided nearly £5.2 
million of funding to the Orb Claimants, in order for them to pursue claims against Mr 
Andrew Ruhan and others in proceedings numbered CL-2012 -000625  (the “ Orb 
Litigation ”). I will address  further below the mechanism by which Harbour’s entitlement 
to a return on its investment is calculated . However , it is also relevant to note here that 
Harbour’s entitlements were secured by:  
32.1 a debenture giving Harbour fixed and floating charges over the whole, or 
substantially the whole, of Orb’s property; and  
32.2 a guarantee from  Dr Cochrane which was in turn secured by a security interest 
agreement over the shares in Orb.  
33 As this Court knows , the Harbour IA is governed by the law of England and Wales  (as are 
the other transaction documents) . 
34 Harbour’s position, in summary, is that there is no basis for disturbing the outcome of t he 
Directed Trial , to include the  Consequentials Order . It is too late for any such attempt to 
be made now to this Court, and i t would be an abuse of process for the Dr Cochrane, or 
Messrs Thomas and Taylor  (or any other party) to argue otherwise.  Moreover, (a) so far as 
Dr Cochrane is concerned, she has signed a Deed by which she has expressly agreed not 
to pursue such points ; and (b) so far as both Dr Cochrane and Mr Thomas are concerned,  
they signed  the 2014 Harbour  Deed  by which they agreed that the recoveries under the 
IOM Settlement were to be treated as “Proceeds received as a result of Success in the 
Proceedings” for the purposes of Cl 9.1 of the Harbour IA an d were to be applied in 
accordance with the terms of that clause . 
35 Further, to the extent that Mr Thomas or others seek to rely on the  PACCAR Decisio n, 
and to the extent this Court is prepared to entertain such arguments at all, its  effect was 
not to make new law regarding whether or not litigation funding agreements , such as the 
Harbour IA , were Damages Based Agreements  (a “DBA ” or collectively “ DBAs ”), subject 
to the terms of the DBA Regulations 2013  (“the DBA Regulations ”). The argument that 
the Harbour IA is a DBA  has been available to the Orb Claimants since the agree ment was 
first entered into and the possibility that the funding arrangements such as the Harbour 
IA were in fact subject to the DBA Regulations ha s been publicly debated in legal, 
academic and political circles since at least 201 4. 
11 
 36 I will set out further below the extensive opportunities that the Orb Claimants  have had 
prior to and during the Directed Trial to seek to run the arguments that Dr Cochrane now 
advances  in the Jersey Recall Application s, and that Mr Thomas has threatened in the 
Thomas  Letter  Before Action . Harbour’s position is that the arguments  advanced by both 
Dr Cochrane and Mr Thomas  (as well as any argument  that she or others may advance in 
opposition to Harbour’s present application), constitute an abuse of process. In the 
alternative, if that is not the case, they are time barred.   
37 Further , and to the extent necessary , Harbour also contends that in any event, the 
PACCAR Decision, even on its merits, does not render  the Harbour IA  unenforceable, or 
that if it does so to some extent, that it is only unenforceable in part . Again, Harbour’s 
arguments will be further developed in its submissions, but a summary of the key points 
advanced, and the evidence upon which they are based, is set out below .  
38 The remainder of this witness statement is accordingly divided into the following sections : 
38.1 The outcome of the Directed Trial as regards Harbour and the Orb Claimants  
(Section C) ; 
38.2 The Smith Parties’  actions since the Directed Trial  (Section D) ; 
38.3 The Actions of Dr Cochrane specifically  (Section E) ;  
38.4 The PACCAR decision and its relevance to the  Harbour IA  (Section F) ;  
38.5 The LCL Settlement Agreement  and the 2014 Harbour Deed (Section G) ; 
38.6 The abusive nature of the Smith Parties’ attempt to  seek to invalidate the Harbour 
IA (Section H) ; 
38.7 Severability of the Harbour IA  (Section I) ; 
38.8 Harbour’s detrimental reliance on the Harbour IA  (Section J) ; 
38.9 Limitation  (Section K) ; 
38.10  Dr Cochrane’s standing  (Section L) ; and 
38.11  Conclusions  (Section M) . 
12 
 C. The outcome of the Directed Trial as regards Harbour and the Orb Claimants  
39 Given the Court’s familiarity with the Directed Trial, I will not rehearse the extensive 
background here. By way of summary only, I set out below the salient facts insofar as this 
Application is concerned.  
40 The Directed Trial in these proceedings commenced on 19 January 2021. Shortly thereafter  
and just before Dr Smith was due to give evidence , on 27 January 2021, the Smith Parties  
(including Dr Smith and Dr Cochrane, but not including Messrs Thomas and Taylor)  
entered into a settlement agreement (the “ LCL Settlement  Agreement ”) (pages  175-
337) with Harbour,  the Serious Fraud Office (“ SFO ”), Stewarts Law LLP (“ Stewarts ”), 
the liquidators of a  group of BVI companies (the “ Joint Liquidators ”), the Viscount of 
the Royal Court of Jersey in  her capacity as the administrator of the en désastres  of Dr 
Cochrane and Orb (the “ Viscount ”), and the Receivers of the realisable property of Dr 
Smith (the “ Enforcement Receivers ”, together the “ Settlement Parties ”). The Smith 
Parties (known in the  LCL Settlement  Agreement  as the LCL Parties)  provided 
undertakings to the Court to assist the Settlement Parties (recorded in an order made on 4 
February 2021  (the “ LCL Discontinuance Order ”)) (pages  338-348) and discontinued 
their claims , taking no further part in the Directed Trial.  
41 On 16 May 2021, the Directed Trial Judgment was handed down. All of the claims 
advanced by Harbour and the other Settlement Parties succeeded in all material respects.  
42 In respect of Orb and Dr Cochrane, the Judge made the following findings:  
42.1 The shares of Orb were found to be the realisable property of Dr Smith, further 
to a Confiscation Order obtained by the SFO on 13 November 2007 in the sum 
of £40,856,9118 (the “ Confiscation Order ”). 
42.2 More generally, the judge found that Dr Cochrane held the shares in the Non -
Arena Companies (including Orb), for Dr Smith, as his nominee.  
42.3 Separately, the Judge found that 50% of Bodega (the company which owns 
Steephill, the property in Jersey in which Dr Cochrane resides) was held by its legal 
owner (Dr Cochrane) on the terms of the Harbour Trust in respect of which the 
Judge subsequently, on 14 December 2022, appointed receivers on the application 
 
8 I understand  that the current balance of the Confiscation Order, including interest, is around £82 million.  
13 
 of Harbour and others and removed the Orb Claimants as trustees (in a further 
significant judgment in relation to this matter  handed down on 30 November 
2022). The remaining 50% is vested in the Viscount as administrator of Dr 
Cochrane’s désastre .  
43 The practical outcome of the Directed Trial was reflected in the Consequentials Order. 
The Judge ordered the following in respect of Harbour’s and the Orb Claimants’ 
entitlement:  
 “4. The interests in the following assets are held by their legal owners on the terms of the Harbour Trust 
and are to be applied and apportioned between the beneficiaries, namely Harbour, Orb arl, and Messrs 
Thomas and Taylor, in accordance with those term s (save as set out below):  
a. The shares in the Arena Companies (as set out in Schedule 2 to this order);  
b. Such future distributions as may be paid or payable to the shareholders of the Arena 
Companies;  
 c. The traceable proceeds of the IOM Settlement Cash, but in particular:  
  i. An equitable interest of 100% in Flat 24 Hamilton House;  
  ii. An equitable interest in 50% of the shares in Bodega;  
  iii. An equitable interest of 100% in Flat 2 Hamilton House;  
  iv. An equitable interest of 15% in Flat 22 Hamilton House;  
v. An equitable interest of 20.26% in the headlease / leasehold of 
Hamilton House and Flats 1, 10, and 14 Hamilton House (for Flats 
10 and 14 Hamilton House, taking effect by way of a first ranking charge 
arising by way of subrogation to discharged securit y); 
vi. An equitable interest of 16.62% in Flats 11, 21 and 23 Hamilton 
House;  
  vii. An equitable interest of 10% in Flat 17 Hamilton House  
d. The traceable proceeds of the £23,921,641.59 paid to Candey LLP which derived 
from the $43.5m Qatar Settlement Payment, but in particular:  
14 
 i. An equitable interest of 90% in Flat 12 Hamilton House 
(reflecting the balance of the purchase price);  
ii. An equitable interest of 88.05% in Montagu Square (reflecting 
the balance of the purchase price);  
subject to such claims as remain available to Mr Pelz following the findings in the Trial Judgment as set 
out below at paragraph [23] (for the avoidance of doubt, this qualification applies only to the assets listed 
at items 2.d.i and ii above).  
5. Any share of the proceeds under the Harbour Trust which is attributable to Orb and Messrs Thomas 
and Taylor shall be adjusted as follows:  
a. The entitlement of Orb and Messrs Thomas and Taylor (after payment out of the 
prior items in the waterfall under the Harbour Trust) shall first be determined without 
any adjustments, based on the following percentages: 62.5% to Orb, 18.75% to Mr 
Thomas and 18.75% to Mr Taylor;  
 b. Thereafter:  
i. Mr Thomas is required to give credit in the sum of £1,010,097.75 
and his entitlement shall be reduced accordingly;  
ii. Mr Taylor is required to give credit in the sum of £1,546,998 and 
his entitlement shall be reduced accordingly.  
c. For the avoidance of doubt, no payment shall be made in respect of the adjusted shares 
until after the amounts secured by the Stewarts lien set out in paragraph [8] have been 
fully satisfied.”  
44 In respect of the Viscount’s entitlement, the Judge ordered the following:  
“14. The Jersey Properties, namely:  
a. 1 Moedwill  Cottage (Les Vaux Cottage), Les Grand Vaux, St Saviour, Jersey JE2 
7NA;  
b. 2 Moedwill Cottage (Les Vaux Cottage), Les Grand Vaux, St Saviour, Jersey JE2 
7NA;  
15 
  c. Montrose, Les Grand Vaux, St Saviour, Jersey JE2 7NA; and  
d. Antoinette Gardens, 49 Langtry Gardens, St Saviour’s Hill, St Saviour, Jersey, 
JE2 7AG,  
 are vested in the Viscount of the Royal Court of Jersey, in her capacity as the administrator of the en 
désastre (bankruptcy) proceedings of Dr Cochrane, free from adverse proprietary rights, save in respect of 
the unchallenged life interest in Antoinette Gardens, which is unaffected by this order.  
 The equitable interest in the 50% of the shares in Bodega vest in the Viscount of the Royal Court of Jersey 
in her capacity as administrator of the en désastre of Dr Cochrane, free from adverse proprietary rights.”  
45 As to the SFO’s position, the Consequentials Order provided for the following regarding 
assets that were the realisable property of Dr Smith and therefore subject to the 
Confiscation Order:  
“16. With the exception of the shares in Bodega, Dr Gerald Martin Smith holds 100% of the equitable 
interest in the shares of each of the Non Arena Companies (as set out in Schedule 2 to this order).  
17. To the extent that the whole equitable interest in Flat 1 Hamilton House is not exhausted by the 
equitable interests of the beneficiaries under the Harbour Trust and the companies under the Joint 
Liquidators’ control respectively, the balance of the eq uitable interest is attributable to Dr Gerald Martin 
Smith.  
18. All of the shares in Litigation Capital Limited are held in the name of Conduit Asset Management 
Limited for Anthony Smith, who in turn holds them as a nominee for Dr Gerald Martin Smith, who 
thereby holds a 100% equitable interest in the said shares.  
19. Save as otherwise provided for by the declarations in this order any and all residuary equitable interests 
in the Relevant Property and IUAs are held either by the Viscount of the Royal Court of Jersey, in her 
capacity as the administrator of the en dé sastre (bankruptcy) proceedings of Dr Cochrane, or by Dr Gerald 
Martin Smith.”  
46 The most immediately relevant aspect of the Directed Trial findings in respect of the SFO 
is that Orb (a Non -Arena Company)  is the realisable  property  of Dr Smith  and therefore 
subject to the SFO’s Confiscation Order , per paragraph 16 of the Consequentials Order.  
While I understand that Dr Cochrane remains the nominal legal shareholder of Orb, the 
Consequentials Order is unequivocal : she has no right to Orb or its assets.   
16 
 47 Dr Cochrane sought, by an application of 10 January 2024 of which I provide further 
details below, to remove Orb from the list of Non -Arena companies in the Consequentials 
Order, and her application was dismissed and certified as being “ totally without merit ”. As 
such, Dr Cochrane has identified no basis for disturbing paragraph 16 of the 
Consequentials Order.  
48 It is particularly notable that Dr Cochrane’s Jersey Recall  Applications , and in particular 
the exercise she proposes in order to assess her personal financial position  are premised in 
large part on  an account of Orb’s assets , which she assert ed (wrongly)  were to be treated 
as her own . In her third affidavit of  11 March 2024 , Dr Cochrane  also initially claimed to  
“own 100% of the shares of Orb”  (pages 349 – 365), and omitted to inform the Jersey 
Court of the full effect of the Directed Trial’s finding that  Orb’s shares constituted the 
realisable property of Dr Smith.  At the hearing of 26 June  2024 , the Jersey Court indicated 
its disapproval of Dr Cochrane’s failure to e xplain the findings as to Orb in the Directed 
Trial Judgment given that she was subject t o a duty of full and frank disclosure when 
seeking permission to serve the Recall Application out of the jurisdiction , and required Dr 
Cochrane to explain her omission . As I note further below, Dr Cochrane has since 
amended her position in relation to the shares of Orb.  
D. The Smith Parties’ actions since the Directed Trial  
49 As indicated above, the Smith Parties have by various means  sought to frustrate the 
outcome of the Directed Trial Judgment and related orders. Given the many separate 
instances, these , with the exception of Dr Cochrane’s activities in Jersey given the recen t 
nature  of the Jersey Recall Applications,  are only summarised in this witness statement. 
Appendix 1 to this statement  contains a more detailed record of the activities in question9.  
50 The disruptive actions , unlawful conduct  and court proceedings issued or necessitated  
include:  
50.1 Resistance on the part of Dr Cochrane of the steps taken by the Enforcement 
Receivers regarding the control  of Casa Coloniches  (a Non -Arena Company) ;  
 
9 Appendix 1 cross -refers to official reports provided by the Enforcement Receivers , in accordance with  the terms of 
the Variation Order dated 7 December 2017  (which I refer to by the prefix “MR ”) and the Receivership Order date d 
14 De cember 2022 . They are restricted to a circulation list which includes Harbour, the Viscount and Mr Thomas, 
but are otherwise confidential.  The Enforcement Receivers have confirmed that these documents may , in redacted 
form,  be referred to for the purp oses of this application. Redactions have been applied in respect of commercially 
sensitive information.  
17 
 50.2 Failure by Dr Smith and o thers to provide  vacant possession of Flats 11, 12, 19, 
20 and 21 Hamilton House , in contravention of their court -ordered obligations ; 
50.3 The failed  Part 8 Claim commenced by Messrs Thomas and Taylor by which , 
among other things,  they sought to appoint Mr Ticehurst as a trustee for an 
improper purpose , resulting in their being removed as trustees ; 
50.4 The commencement and/or defence of five sets of interlinked proceedings in the 
Republic of the Marshall Islands by associates of Dr Smith including Mr Thomas, 
which include opposing the recognition of the Enforcement Receivers' 
appointment over shares of t he Non -Arena Companies;  
50.5 Conduct of Mr Thomas in relation to the purported transfer by LCL of it s shares 
in SMA and GACH which led to the Enforcement Receivers commencing 
contempt proceedings against him ;  
50.6 The actions of Dr Smith which led to his being convicted of contempt of court in 
July 2022;  
50.7 Mr Thomas’ application for permission to appea l the receivership order made by 
Foxton J on 14 December 2022 and seeking a stay of the receivership arising 
thereunder (which was dismissed by the Court of Appeal)  (pages  366-378); 
50.8 Attempts made by the Smith Parties , via companies called Minardi and BKV, to  
prevent the transfer of the shares of SMA to  newly appointed trustees of the 
Harbour Trust;  
50.9 An application by Messrs Thomas and Taylor  for an order that claims to certain 
assets be assigned to them  (pages 3 79-381). This led to the Debarring/Stay 
Directions  (pages  382-384); 
50.10  Proceedings involving Mr Sodzawiczny  before the Isle of Man  courts, which 
culminated in Mr Thomas and a Mr Miah  (who  had been involved in the activities 
referred to at paragraph 50.8 above ) being found to be in contempt of court as a 
result of their failure to remove  a company director whose actions were in breach 
of an injunction protecting Mr Sodzawiczny’s interests in property in Spain ;  
18 
 50.11  Prolonged o bstruction  of the Enforcement Receivers  by Dr Cochrane and other 
Dr Smith associates10 in respect of C’an  Agata and Son Montserrat (the “Spanish 
Properties ”); 
50.12  Dr Smith and Dr Cochrane purporting to commence an LCIA Arbitration 
resulting in Mr Sodzawiczny needing to seek and obtaining an anti -arbitration 
injunction;  
50.13  The Slip Rule Application;  
50.14  Mr Thomas’s threatened claim against Harbour  in respect of his purported rights 
under the Harbour IA to require H arbour to indemn ify him for his own 
outstanding costs obligations  (pages 3 88 – 389)11; 
50.15  Dr Smith being convicted of fraud on 29 July 2024 in relation to fraudulently 
obtaining COVID -19 Bounce Back Loans , and subsequently on 20 September 
2024 sentenced to 18 months imprisonment12. A portion of the funds he 
fraudulently obtained were used to pay costs orders owed to the SFO pursuant to 
an order made by Foxton  J on 29 June 2020 ; 
50.16  Actions of Dr Smith  in breach of the Restraint Order and in breach of the 
undertakings given in relation to the LCL Settlement Agreement. This has led to 
the SFO commencing further contempt of court proceedings against him which 
are due to be heard in October 2024 ;  
50.17  Further to the actions of Dr Cochrane in relation to the Spanish Properties which 
I refer to above, she subsequently sought to argue in these proceedings that the 
LCL Settlemen t Agreement and LCL Discontinuance Order had been 
“superseded ”13. This matter culminated in a ruling from Foxton J on 18 April 2024 
that it had not, which I describe in further detail below ; 
 
10 Mr Thomas wrote to Harbour and the E nforcement Receiver s and well as the Viscount  and others  on 28 September  
2023, claiming that the ERs needed the Orb Claimants’  consent to sell Son Monser rat, and that  its proposed sale 
would be unlawful  (pages  385-387). Mr Thomas’s  position was entirely incorrect, as confirmed by Foxton J’s 18 April 
2024 ruling which I refer to below.  
11 On 31 May 2024, we replied to Mr Thomas  to indicate that Harbour did not accept the liability alleged in his letter  
(page 389A ). 
12 https://www.cityoflondon.police.uk/news/city -of-london/news/2024/september/man -jailed -for-fraudulently -
receiving -a-50000 -covid -bounce -back-loan-to-help-pay-back-historic -72-million -fraud -court -order/  (pages 390-
391). 
13 Witness Statement of Dr Cochrane dated 24 April 2024  (pages 392-401) 
19 
 50.18  Dr Smith’s a pplication  of 8 July 2024 to discharge  the SFO’s Restraint  Order of 
2005 and set aside the Confiscation Order of 200714 (pages  402-438), and related 
subsequent receivership orders made in these proceedings  (the “ Discharge 
Application ”); and  
50.19  Dr Smith’s subsequent letter of 12 July 2024 (pages  439-441) in which he again 
asserted rights over the Hamilton House properties I refer to above, and sought to 
undermine the outcome of the Directed Trial.  
51 It is clear from this correspondence and my prior knowledge of these proceedings that the 
actions of Dr Cochrane and Mr Thomas are being orchestrated by Dr Smith  in order to 
force the Settlement Parties, including  Harbour to expend further time and costs and to 
erode the value of the assets under the management of the various office holders , and , via 
threat s of interminable legal action by Dr Smith and/or his proxies, to  pressurise  the 
Settlement Parties into foregoing the fruits of their success at the Directed Trial.  
52 The actions of the Smith Parties  (described in more detail in Appendix 1)  to seek to deprive 
Harbour of its entitlement pursuant to the Harbour IA , as well as their resistance to and 
obstruction of  the efforts of the court-appointed office holders whose job is to manage 
and realise the assets which were the subject of the Directed Trial , have been almost  
continuous  since the Directed Trial Judgment was handed down on 18 May 2021. I would 
respectfully suggest that t he challenges which they have mounted in re liance upon  the 
PACCAR Decision should be considered  in that context ; namely, that arguments  over 
enforceability of the Harbour IA are merely the latest means by which  these parties seek 
to undermine  decisions of this court with  which  Dr Smith and others do not agree.  
E. The actions of Dr Cochrane  specifically  
53 This section  of my witness statement  describes certain  relevant  actions of Dr Cochrane in 
this jurisdiction and elsewhere both before and after the Directed Trial Judgment . Conduct 
of Dr Cochrane not covered below is either addresse d in Appendix 1 or has been deemed 
unnecessary to include  at this stage .   
Correspondence between Dr Cochrane and Harbour since April 2023  
 
14 I note that by his covering letter  of the same date , Dr Smith stated that “ As this matter will impact the Orb Claimants, 
Dr Cochrane, the Attorney General of Jersey and Harbour it has been copied to them ”. 
20 
 54 In a letter dated 11 April 2023  (pages  439-448) Dr Cochrane alleged breaches by Harbour 
of the Harbour IA, a conspiracy against the Orb Claimants by Harbour and the Settlement 
Parties, and that (directly contrary to the findings of the Directed Tr ial) she was personal ly 
entitle d to the assets of Orb.  Specifically, her letter stated : 
 “by failing to honour [Harbour’s] agreements terms [they] prevented us from obtaining 
additional litigation funding…this was [Harbour’s] first repudiatory breach”.  
 
“the [2019 Settlement Agreement] sets outs out the mechanics of [Harbour’s] conspiracy against 
the Orb Claimants”   
 
“The Orb claimants won [the Directed Trial]. The so called settling parties have not. And yet 
you have over the last 2 years, as “Lead” conspired to prevent the Harbour Trust from coming 
into functional being in fundamental breach of your own Harbour IA te rms”. 
 
“The monies recovered by the Orb Claimants belong to them pursuant to the terms of the Harbour 
IA trust arrangements. I, as the 100% owner of Orb, want it to receive what it is entitled to.”  
55 My firm responded to these accusations on 11 May 2023  (pages 452-454): 
55.1 confirming that Harbour emphatically den ied any impropriety or breach of any 
obligations , or that it has  caused Dr Cochrane  any loss; 
 
55.2 Reiterating the position on Orb’s ownership, referring to the Directed Trial 
judgment whereby it was held that, notwithstanding Dr Cochrane being the 
registered shareholder, the shares held in Orb were held as nominee for Dr Smith 
and therefore, recoverable by the SFO ; and 
55.3 Indicating  to Dr Cochrane that her correspondence appeared to be a “ coordinated 
attempt by [her], Mr Thomas and Dr Smith to further frustrate the outcome of the Directed 
Trial” . 
56 It is clear to me that  from at least April 2023, Dr Cochrane’s intention was to gain control 
of the assets of the Harbour Trust, as well as the assets of Orb. This is the position she 
maintains now , albeit premised on the alleged unenforceability of the Harbour IA, rather 
than the previous allegations of (presumably repudiatory) breache s of the Harbour IA  by 
21 
 Harbour.  However, as the Court will note, this chain of communications was commenced 
by Dr Cochrane before  the PACCAR Decision  was handed down .  
57 Following the PACCAR Decision , Dr Cochrane re -commenced correspondence with 
Harbour, now seeking its agreement to an application to set aside or annul her désastre , and 
that of Orb, on the ground that they were obtained by Harbour in circumstances where  
the Harbour IA was an unlawful and/or unenforceable agreement.  
58 On numerous  occasions during this period, Harbour set out its position to Dr Cochrane 
in correspondence. By way of example, in a letter of 10 August 2023  (pages 452-453), my 
firm responded to Dr Cochrane as follows:  
“5. As to paragraph 7 of your letter, Harbour’s position is as follows:  
a) The orders made in and in relation to the SFO Proceedings numbered CL -2017- 000323 
including the Directed Trial Consequentials Order and the 14 December 2022 Trust and 
Receivership Order remain valid, binding and enforceable and Harbour will naturally a bide by 
their terms.  
b) No party sought to challenge the enforceability of the Investment Agreement at the Directed 
Trial despite having had the opportunity to do so. Any attempt to do so now would constitute an 
abuse of the court’s process.  
c) Your suggestion that the Investment Agreement “was unlawful from its signature and is 
unenforceable” is legally misconceived, for various reasons, and is in any case irrelevant given that 
the underlying issues have already been adjudicated.”  
59 On 14 August 2023, Dr Cochrane accused both Harbour and the Viscount of an “ unlawful 
means conspiracy to manipulate [her] circumstances to keep [her] in a state of “desastre” for [their] 
improper economic purposes. Manipulation that has been ongoing for almost 7 years ” (pages  457-458). 
The letter, as well as a letter dated 16 August 2023  (pages  459-460), sought to obtain their 
consent to support Dr Cochrane’s application to “set aside/ annul” the désastre  orders.  
60 On 21 August 2023, Dr Cochrane again accused Harbour of “ an evolving conspiracy that 
repetitively breached the Harbour IA terms ”, alleging that Harbour “ victimised ” the funded parties  
(pages  461- 463).  
61 In a letter dated 25 August 2023, Dr Cochrane assert ed that she intended to seek 
“…compensatory and or restitutionary damages. Be that through the Courts of Jersey, the Privy Counsel  
22 
 [sic], the English High Court or the courts of the Cayman Islands or the USA ”. In the same letter, 
Dr Cochrane again allege d that Harbour has “ deliberately and with malice and forethought  [sic], 
unlawfully damaged and impacted my family’s and my life and the Orb Claimants rights ” (pages  464-
465). 
62 On 23 October 2023, Dr Cochrane made another request for Harbour to agree to a 
consent order in support of her set aside application  (pages 466-467). On the same day, 
our firm responded, repeating Harbour’s position that her assertion as to  the supposed 
“mistake”  in the drafting of the Consequentials Order was “baseless and inaccurate”  (pages  
468-469). 
63 Materially similar allegations were made by Dr Cochrane on the next day, 24 October 2023, 
in relation to the composition of the Non -Arena companies and Orb’s ownership in direct 
conflict with the Directed Trial Judgment and Consequentials Order, as well as  against 
Harbour of “ serial (and most probably repudiatory breaches) of its own agreements terms ” (pages  470-
474). 
The Slip Rule Application  
64 Notwithstanding this firm having set  out Harbour’s  position  on the matter  in 
correspondence , Dr Cochrane  ultimately filed an application on 10 January 2024 to amend 
the Consequentials Order purportedly under the ‘Slip Rule’ to remove Orb from the list 
of Non -Arena Companies, on the basis that it had been included by mistake when the 
order was drafted (the “ Slip Rule Application ”) (pages  475-487). 
65 On 15 January 2024, my firm filed written submissions in response to the Slip Rule 
Application  (pages  488-494), arguing that the application should be dismissed for the 
following reasons:  
65.1 Dr Cochrane did  not have standing to bring this application, on the basis that she 
remains subject to désastre  in Jersey and is represented by the Viscount;  
65.2 The application was without merit ; and  
65.3 The application was made by and/or with the support of Dr Smith and his 
associates, with the aim of frustrating court judgments and orders. All of the 
previous correspondence purportedly sent by Dr Cochrane bear s the distinctive 
hallmarks of Dr Smith ’s letter -writing style . Further,  Harbour ’s submissions  
referred to  a letter of 2 January 2024 which purports to have been sent by Dr 
23 
 Cochrane and Mr Thomas to Susan Dunn of Harbour, Mr Jackson of Quantuma 
(one of the Joint Liquidators) as well as the managing partner of Stewarts Law, Mr 
Dench, containing allegations of conspiracy by Harbour, the Joint Liquidators and 
Stewarts against the Orb Claimants. The metadata on this letter showed  that it was 
drafted by Dr Smith (who is listed as the ‘author’), rather than by Dr Cochrane.  
66 On 17 January 2024, Dr Cochrane responded to Harbour’s  submissions by asserting that:  
“…the Directed Trial did not determine that my ownership of Orb arl was as a nominee for Dr Gerald 
Smith as paragraph 1 of the Consequentials Order makes clear ” (paragraph 4)  (pages  495-500). 
67 On the same day, Dr Cochrane wrote to the Viscount’s Jersey lawyers, Ogier  (pages  501-
503). In particular, she wrote that : 
“I understand from that advice that at the convening hearing the Royal Court will be asked to 
make substantive decisions as to whether certain claimants who have filed claims in my désastre 
process and the désastre process of Orb a.r.l (Orb) are properly t o be treated as creditors. It 
would be unreasonable to ask the Royal Court to undertake the process of reviewing all the 
claims with respect to Orb if it is a Non -Arena company.”  
68 Shortly thereafter,  on 22 January 2024 , Foxton J dismissed the Slip Rule Application on 
the papers, on the basis  that D r Cochrane had no standing , and certified the application 
itself as being “ totally without merit”  (“the Slip Rule Application Ruling ”) (pages  504-
505). In his ruling, Foxton J highlighted (inter alia) the following relevant passages of the 
Directed Trial Judgment  (with emphasis added ): 
 
“606. Subject to (a) my finding as to the Retained 50% in Bodega (at [503(iv)] above) and (b) any issues 
which arise as to the effect of the Ozturk No 2 Trust which do not form part of the Directed Trial, I am 
satisfied that Dr Cochrane held the shares in the Non -Arena Companies as Dr Smith’s nominee. I would 
note that neither Dr Cochrane nor Dr Smith now seek to challenge this finding, and I am satisfied that it 
is established on the evidence.  In summary:  
 
i) Dr Smith has a track record of seeking to disguise his interest in assets behind Dr Cochrane. 
The investigations brought by the SFO in connection with the Izodia Theft identified a ski chalet 
held through a corporate vehicle of which Dr Cochrane was a di rector and the transfer of his 
luxury car collection into Dr Cochrane’s name shortly after the Izodia Theft came to light.  
24 
  
ii) Although notionally assetless, Dr Smith has been able to live “high on the hog” (in his own 
phrase) off assets notionally owned by Dr Cochrane, spending those assets in accordance with Dr 
Smith’s idiosyncratic tastes (including a commissioned water clo ck and artwork chosen by Dr 
Smith) or for his personal benefit (for example on private jet travel, much of which involved Dr 
Smith travelling alone). While I accept that much of the money spent by Dr Smith belonged to 
others, the freedom with which he diss ipated assets notionally in Dr Cochrane’s ownership is 
relevant when considering whether such interest as Dr Cochrane had in those assets was held in 
her own right, or as Dr Smith’s nominee.  
 
iii) Dr Cochrane has on a number of occasions proclaimed that she is a “busy GP with two young 
daughters and no real business experience”, with minimal knowledge of Dr Smith’s business 
activities. Dr Smith has himself accepted that Dr Cochrane lacked “any independent experience 
of the world of business, the world of property deals ”. The vast network of companies which she 
apparently owns, and the complex web of dealings in which those companies have engaged, strongly 
support the suggestion that her involvem ent is nothing more than as a cipher, and that Dr Smith 
– with his extensive track -record of complex, contrived and dishonest business dealings – is 
“calling the shots” .  
 
iv) Dr Cochrane has no obvious sources of independent wealth from which she might have acquired 
these assets independently of Dr Smith. In 2005, according to her own evidence, she was close to 
destitution, and in 2014 and 2016, she gave accounts of her assets and wealth which identified 
no substantial assets beyond those transferred under the IOM Settlement .  
 
v) The confiscation order made against Dr Smith gave him every incentive to hide his ownership 
of assets behind a nominee owner who he could trust to follow his directions.  It is clear that Dr 
Smith has acted at all times since the Confiscation Order was made with a view to making it 
appear as if he has no assets – for example his Deed of Separation with Dr Cochrane of 11 
March 2014 sought to give Dr Smith all the benefits o f certain properties, while transferring no 
property for the SFO to attach.  
 
69 The Slip Rule Application Ruling  constituted an unambiguous rejection of  Dr Cochrane’s 
contention that she was entitled to treat  Orb’s assets as her own on the basis that Orb was 
not a Non -Arena Company.  By extension, her contention that Orb’s assets should be 
25 
 treated as her own  for the purposes of determining  her balance sheet solvency is 
unsustainable . Notwithstanding this definitive ruling  (and the Directed Trial Judgment  and 
the LCL Settlement  Agreement ), this assertion as to Dr Cochrane’s ownership of Orb was 
advanced in Dr Cochrane’s Third Affidavit of 11 March 2024 in support of her Amended 
Representation  (pages 348-364) (as described in more detail at paragraph 33 of  Appendix 
2 below), in which at paragraph 28 she states that she “ holds 100% of the shares  of Orb a.r.l ” 
(omitting any mention of the findings of the Directed Trial in relation to Orb) and then, 
at paragraph 35, claims that Orb’s assets are “ relevant in calculating [her] balance sheet solvency ”. 
I respectfully suggest that, in so doing, she was seeking actively to mislead the Jersey Court.  
70 Perhaps in response to the concerns raised by the Jersey Court over her characterisation 
of the ownership of Orb , Dr Cochrane ’s position in Jersey has more recently developed, 
such that she now concedes that “it is correct that paragra ph 16 of the Order of Foxton J dated 11 
June 2021 … states that Dr Smith holds 100 % of the equitable interest of the shares in the Non -Arena 
Companies (listed in Schedule 2 of that Order )”. However, in order to maintain her position in 
respect of Orb’s recall application, Dr Co chrane now argues that  “the Directed Trial did not 
determine the ownership of the assets owned by the Non -Arena Companies ”, which, for the first time, 
she now asserts “ are held on resulting trust of [sic] the benefit of the Orb Claimants ”. (page 1061 ) 
Dr Cochrane has not yet elucidated how her arguments regarding Orb are to her own 
benefit, given that she holds no interest in Orb , and it is not a fully accurate statement in 
any event, given that the IUAs (which the Directed Trial did determine ownership of ) were 
owned by various Non -Arena Companies .  
71 A summary of the background to Dr Cochrane’s Jersey Recall Applications is set out in 
Appendix 2 to this statement , which has been prepared with the assistance of Harbour’s 
Jersey lawyers . 
F. The PACCAR Decision  and its relevance  to the Harbour IA  
72 This Court will be  aware of the PACCAR Decision. By way of very brief summary, the 
Supreme  Court found that certain litigation funding  agreements fell within the definition 
of DBAs , for the purposes of the section 58AA of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990  
(“CLSA 1990 ”). 
73 However, in order to establish if the Harbour IA  is in fact a DBA, a thorough  analysis is 
required of the relevant regulatory framework, and of the Harbour IA itself.  
26 
 74 For an agreement to qualify as a damages based agreement, such that it is subject to the 
DBA Regulations, it must satisfy three requirements (see Section 58AA (3) CLSA 1990 ): 
74.1 First, it must be an agreement between a person providing “ advocacy services,  litigation 
services or claims management services ” and the recipient of those services;  
74.2 Second, it must provide for the recipient “ to make a payment to the service provider if the 
recipient obtains a specified financial benefit in connection with the matter in relation to which the 
services are provided ”; and  
74.3 Third, the amount of that payment must be “ determined by reference to the amount of the 
financial benefit obtained by the recipient ”. 
75 My understanding is that the PACCAR Decision revolved principally around the first of 
these grounds, and established that litigation funders were providers of “ claims management 
services ”. Harbour cannot, and does not, dispute this finding or the reasoned conclusions 
of the Supreme Court  before this Court (although it reserves its position in the event that 
any other point ultimately had to be determined by the Supreme Court) .15 As such, for 
these purposes  Harbour proceeds on the basis that it provides claims management 
services, and thus the Harbour IA  satisfies the first requirement  of a DBA according to 
the CLSA 1990.  
76 In relation to the second requirement, I understand this to apply to any contingent  funding, 
non-recourse agreement whereby the funder will only receive a return if the funded parties 
succeed and proceeds are received.  This is the basis upon which Harbour and other 
funders  structure their funding agreements, and Harbour will not seek to contend 
otherwise in respect of the Harbour IA.  
77 For the purposes of this statement, I will focus on the third CLSA requirement, namely 
that a DBA contains provision for a funder’s return which are “ determined by reference to the 
amount of the financial benefit obtained by the recipient ”. I understand this to mean, in simple 
terms, where a funding agreement provides for a funder’s return to be calculat ed by 
 
15 I note, however, that considerable efforts have been made by the legislature to introduce legislation in order to 
correct this position, which appears not to have been intended by the drafters of the amendment to the CLSA 1990. 
Unfortunately given the timing of the General Election , it has not yet been possible for this legislation to be passed. 
While Harbour, alongside others in the funding industry, remain hopeful that such legislation will be introduced, in 
the intervening period the PACCAR Decision has allowed parties such as Dr  Cochrane and others to seek to 
undermine funding agreements such as the Harbour IA  notwithstanding the fact that the funded parties have taken 
the benefit of the funding . 
27 
 reference to a percentage of the proceeds of the funded action, and it also satisfies the first 
two criteria set out above, it will meet the definition of a DBA.  
78 The Harbour IA , at Schedule 2,  contains a mechanism for calculating Harbour’s return in 
the event that the Orb Claimants succeeded in the funded proceedings, which I extract 
below  (“Schedule 2 ”): 
 
79 This tiered structure was agreed in order to  account for both the time period of the receipt 
of any Proceeds, as well as the amount of such proceeds. As I understand it, this again 
conforms with standard industry practice. The first two rows were agreed to cover the 
eventuality of an early settlemen t of the funded proceedings, in order to allow for greater 

28 
 recovery by the Orb Claimants in the event that the proceedings were brief. Harbour’s 
return is therefore based on recovery both on a percentage basis, and by reference to a 
multiple of its investment.  
80 If a funding agreement meets the criteria  set out in the CLSA 1990  it is a DBA which must 
also comply with the requirements of the DBA Regulations , in particular Section 3 of those 
regulations:  
3.  The requirements prescribed for the purposes of section 58AA(4)(c) of the Act are that the terms and 
conditions of a damages -based agreement must specify — 
(a) the claim or proceedings or parts of them to which the agreement relates;  
(b) the circumstances in which the representative’s payment, expenses and costs, or part 
of them, are payable; and  
 (c) the reason for setting the amount of the payment at the level agreed, which, in an 
employment matter, shall include having regard to, where appropriate, whether the claim 
or proceedings is one of several similar claims or proceedings.  
81 It is my understanding that it has never been  standard practice in the funding industry, as 
reflected in  the approach taken in the Harbour IA , to include  reasons in funding 
agreements  for the funder’s return. No such reasons are set out in the Harbour IA. As 
such, again, Harbour does not conten d that the Harbour IA  meets the requirements of the 
DBA Regulations.  I note that the Minister of State responsible for piloting the DBA 
Regulations through Parliament, Lord McNally, followed up questions on the draft 
regulations in Grand Committee with a formal written response to Lord Beecham on 5 
March 20 13 (pages 50 6-510), shortly before they were promulgated  on 1 April 2013 . He 
stated that: “ The DBA Re gulations update the 2010 regulations, and take account of recommendations 
made by the Civil Justice Council (CJC) .” 
82 The CJC’s position had been set out in a letter dated 24 October 2012 to the Ministry of 
Justice  (pages 5 11-514) in the context of the statutory consultation required under LASPO , 
which was also extended to non -statutory stakeholders . Among the CJC’s  
recommendations had been a  proposed  amendment to the information required to be 
given to a client entering a DBA , which referred to the availability of other methods of 
financing the claim or financing the proceedings. The CJC suggested the addition of third 
29 
 party litigation funding into the list, reflecting its view that this was a type of alternative to 
a DBA, not a DBA itself , and that the Government was not consulting on the basis that 
litigation funding agreements would be subject to the regulations .  
83 The CJC’s suggestion was not taken up. However, in Lord McNally’s letter, u nder the 
heading “Third party litigation funding” he expressly stated  on behalf of the Government : 
The matter was debated at some length during the passage of the LASPO Act through Parliament. Some 
colleagues were concerned about the future growth of third party litigation funding arrangements and, in 
particular, a move into personal injury claims. While there was a call for the introduction of statutory 
regulation, the Government does not believe this is the right course of action at this  stage: rather this is an 
issue that we are keeping under review and we will not hesitate to act should we need to do  so in the future.  
 
G. The LCL Settlement Agreement  and the 2014 Harbour Deed  
 
84 As outlined above, on 27 January 2021, shortly after the Directed Trial commenced , Dr 
Smith,  Dr Cochrane  and other Smith Parties entered into the LCL Settlement  Agreement .  
85 The relevant terms of this agreement are:  
85.1 Paragraph 3  
“The LCL Parties hereby release, discharge and waive (and agree to treat as released, discharged 
and waived in all respects and for all purposes) all and any actions, claims, rights, demands and 
set-offs, whether capable of being litigated or enforced in t his jurisdiction or any other, whether 
presently known or unknown to the Parties or to the law, and whether arising in law or equity, 
under statute or otherwise, that they have, had, may have or hereafter can or shall or may 
subsequently acquire, against t he Settlement Parties or any other person, where such action, claim, 
right, demand or set -off etc relates to or arises out of or in connection with:  
3.1. The Relevant Property;  
3.2. The Identified Underlying Assets and the £2 million paid into Stewarts’ client account in 
September 2016;  
3.3. The Settlement Assets, Jersey Settlement Assets, Arena Property, Additional Settlement 
Assets, Arena Surplus and Net Proceeds of Realisation as defined in the Settlement Agreement;  
30 
 3.4. Any property transferred under the IOM Settlement and / or Geneva Settlement and/or 
the substitute or traceable proceeds thereof; and  
3.5. (For the avoidance of doubt) The LCL Parties’ claims to the assets listed in Schedule 1;  
For the avoidance of doubt, and consistent with the general nature of the release, discharge and 
waiver intended to be provided by this Clause 3, the claims released by this paragraph shall include 
but not be limited to any proprietary, equitable or other claims of any nature whatsoever, including 
(without limitation) any asserted equitable interests, mere equities, security interests, or asserted 
claims or entitlements to tenancies, licences  or other rights to possession of any real  property  
comprised with in the said assets (or directly or indirectly held by companies whose shares are 
included within the said assets) and where the asset in question relates to shares in a company, 
any claims held against the company in question  and its direct or indirect subsidiaries, in addition 
to the shares themselves.  
(together the “ Paragraph 3 Property ”)” 
85.2 Paragraph 6:  
“Further to the above paragraph, and for the avoidance of doubt, the LCL Parties will not seek 
to challenge the Settlement Parties’ cases at the Directed Trial, including their cases to the effect 
that the Paragraph 3 Property is the realisable property of Gerald Martin Smith, subject to any 
equitable/proprietary interests therein which may be established and which  take priority pursuant 
to the provisions of the Criminal Justice Act 1988, and / or their cases that the Paragraph 3 
Property falls within Dr Co chrane’s en désastre estate, or Orb ARL’s en désastre estate, subject 
to any such prior equitable/proprietary interests as are capable of binding such estates.”  
85.3 Paragraph 9  
9. The LCL Parties and each of them undertake to the Settlement Parties and will undertake to 
the Court (in an order bearing a penal notice):  
9.1. To use their reasonable endeavours to assist the Settlement Parties and each of them to realise 
the Paragraph 3 Property for the benefit of whichever person is ultimately found by the Court, or 
is agreed to be, entitled to that Paragraph 3 Property.  
31 
 9.2. Not to impede, obstruct or hinder in any way, whether directly or indirectly or by way of 
assistance rendered to any third party, any attempts made by the Settlement Parties or any of them 
to safeguard and/or realise the Paragraph 3 Property.  
9.3. To comply, as soon as reasonably practicable, with reasonable requests made of them by the 
ERs, JLs and/or Viscount (including, for the avoidance of doubt, by meeting with the ERs, JLs 
and/or Viscount, providing them with information or documentation,  and executing such 
documents as they may require) in connection with safeguarding and/or realising the Paragraph 
3 Property.  
9.4. To take the specific steps or refrain from taking the specific steps (as the case may be) as set 
out in Schedule 3, save that a reference to one or more of the LCL Parties individually in relation 
to a specific obligation contained therein shall not b e considered to be an obligation owed by the 
remaining LCL Parties.”  
86 It has be come  apparent to Harbour, and to me, that the Smith Parties, in particular Dr 
Smith and Dr Cochrane, have never intended to honour the terms of the LCL Settlement 
Agreement. Indeed, shortly after the conclusion of the Directed Trial, on 9 August 2021, 
my firm received a letter from Mr Spragg of Keystone Law, solicitors to Litigation Capital 
Limited (“ LCL ”)16, arguing that Harbour did not succeed at the Directed Trial and 
therefore the LCL Settlement Agreement had “ no continuing force or effect ” (page  515). We 
responded on 12 August 2021, refuting this assertion. Mr Spragg responded on 16 August 
2021, noting (without explanation) that:  
• “The judgement awarded all the assets to the Orb Claimants,  
• The LCL parties’ – SPs parties’ agreement was conditional and between themselves.  It did not 
include the Orb Claimants,  
• LCL did not release the Orb Claimants ” (pages  516-517). 
87 The background to LCL ’s involvement in these proceedings  is well known to the Court 
and I will not rehearse it in detail  here. In short, LCL is a vehicle of the Smith Parties, and 
at various times Dr Cochrane, Mr Taylor and Mr Anthony Smith (Dr Smith’s brother) 
 
16 On 24 November 2021 , we received an email from an ‘Admin  LCL’ proton  mail account  attaching a document 
headed ‘Notice of Change’ which stated that  Keystone Law no longer acted for LCL and that LCL would be acting 
in person.  
32 
 have been its directors. I n the circumstances,  therefore , Mr Spragg’s correspondence was 
sent in the interests (and most  likely at the direction) of Dr Smith, Dr Cochrane and Messrs 
Thomas and Taylor , who , as early as two months after the Consequentials Order was made,  
were already putting into motion plans  to prevent the Settlement Parties from enforcing 
the rights they had established at the Directed Trial. While no party has formally sought to 
challenge the validity of the LCL Settlement Agreement, sever al of the Smith Parties have 
acted in clear breach of its terms. I summarise several such acts below, and refer to further 
details which are set out in Appendix 1:  
87.1 Mr Thomas appears to have colluded with LCL in relation to its efforts in the 
Republic of the Marshall Islands to frustrate the efforts of the Enforcement 
Receivers, in contravention of LCLs’ obligations under the LCL Settlement 
Agreement and the LCL Disco ntinuance Order. In doing so, Mr Thomas incited 
a clear breach of the LCL Discontinuance Order by LCL. The Enforcement 
Receivers commenced contempt proceedings against Mr Thomas, which were 
ultimately discontinued when Mr Thomas corrected the position.  
87.2 Dr Smith directly committed numerous breaches of the LCL Settlement 
Agreement by impeding the Enforcement Receivers’ attempts to manage and 
realise assets to which Harbour is entitled pursuant to the Directed Trial Judgment, 
namely the Hamilton House properties;  
87.3 Dr Cochrane breached her obligations under the LCL Settlement Agreement by 
impeding the efforts of the Enforcement Receivers to manage and realise 
properties in Spain, which ultimately led to the ruling of 18 April 2024 to which I 
refer below.  
88 In the case of Dr Cochrane,  as I outline above, the release of claims under the LCL 
Settlement is directly relevant to  the Jersey Recall Applications . This is because  Dr 
Cochrane has asserted  proprietary  rights over Orb  (which also disregards the outcome of 
the Directed Trial) , as well as listing within her estate various properties to which she has 
waived any rights by way of the LCL Settlement  Agreement . 
89 Although this will be a matter for development in submissions, Harbour’s position is that 
the release and waiver given by Dr Cochrane and the other Smith Parties under the LCL 
Settlement  Agreement  is broad and (as set out above) extends to, among other things: “all 
33 
 and any actions, claims, rights, demands and set -offs, whether capable of being litigated or enforced in this 
jurisdiction or any other, whether presently known or unknown to the Parties or to the law, and whether 
arising in law or equity, under statute or  otherwise, that they have, had, may have or hereafter can or shall 
or may subsequently acquire …” 
90 The LCL Settlement Agreement also contains no -contest clauses. I would respectfully 
suggest that , taken as a whole, the LCL Settlement Agreement  precludes Dr Cochrane 
from seeking to ventilate the arguments that she does in relation to the effect of PACCAR 
on the Directed Trial Judgment and the Harbour IA in  the Jersey Proceedings – she has 
agreed to a full settlement and is no longer entitled to seek to go behind Harbour’s 
entitlements.  
91 As I explain above, while LCL (and thus, undoubtedly, Dr Smith) questioned the validity 
and enforceability of the LCL Settlement Agreement, Dr Cochrane has not formally 
advanced this position, as far as Harbour is aware . Instead, in her Jersey Recall Applications 
she has sought simply to ignore it. As the Court is aware, however, the issue of the validity 
of the LCL Settlement Agreement (and more specifically the LCL Discontinuance Order) 
came before the Court earlier this year  and has been determined . 
92 While Harbour was not directly involved, I am aware of a ruling in these proceedings given 
on 18 April 2024 (the “ LCL Undertakings Ruling ”) (pages  518-519). I understand the 
context of this ruling is complex, and relates to efforts made by the Enforcement Receivers 
to carry out their duties to realise certain assets in Spain, which Dr Cochrane has incorrectly 
asserted belong to the Orb Claimants. As set out above and further explained in Appendix 
1, Dr Cochrane has impeded the efforts of the Enforcement Rec eivers, in direct 
contravention of the undertakings she gave in the LCL Discontinuance Order, which 
reflect Dr Cochrane’s obligations pursuant to the LCL Settlement Agreement, and which 
are accompanied by a penal notice.  
93 My understanding is that the LCL Undertakings Ruling’s effect was to confirm the binding 
nature of the undertakings contained within the LCL Discontinuance Order. As such, I 
respectfully suggest that Dr Cochrane’s obligations under the LCL Settlement Agree ment 
remain valid and binding  and that the Court has already finally determined this question . 
94 I also note that the LCL Undertakings Ruling contained the following finding at paragraph 
12: 
34 
 “Dr Cochrane has no standing to act in any form of trustee capacity on behalf of the Orb Claimants, still 
less to take decisions intended to give Dr Smith (who is not an Orb Claimant) the use of any assets .” 
95 I consider it likely  that Dr Cochrane’s Jersey Recall Applications are being conducted with 
the assistance, and likely at the direction of Dr Smith, who seeks to regain control of the 
property which is within Dr Cochrane and Orb’s désastres . 
96 On the basis of the foregoing, I respectfully ask the Court to grant the relief sought by 
Harbour in reliance upon the LCL Settlement Agreement, as set out at paragraph 5.1 
above.  
97 A second issue arising from an agreement affects both Dr Cochrane and Mr Thomas, to 
the extent that they might otherwise be able to attack the Harbour IA on the basis of the 
PACCAR Decision. The 2014 Harbour Deed was signed from October 2014 onwards, 
and postdated the receipt of the assets under the IOM Settlement. Each of Dr Cochrane 
and Mr Thomas (amongst others) agreed that the recoveries under the IOM Settlement 
were to be treated as “Proceeds received as a result of Success in the Proceedings” for the 
purposes of Cl 9.1 of the Harbour IA and were to be applied in accordance with the terms 
of that clause.  Accordingly, each of Dr Cochrane and Mr Thomas are estopped by deed 
from contesting that position. In addition, the 2014 Harbour Deed is  on any view not a 
DBA – it no longer relates to a future contingency, but regulates the effect of an event that 
had by that stage already happened.  
H. The abusive nature of the Smith Parties’ attempt  to seek to invalidate the Harbour 
IA 
98 Harbour's position is that the Orb Claimants could have argued that the Harbour IA was 
a DBA and sought to undermine Harbour’s entitlement under the agreement at any time 
after it was agreed  (although possibly  not immediately) . The DBA Regulations entered into 
force on 1 April 2013, and the Harbour IA was executed on 10 July 2013.  As set out above, 
it is accepted that at that point, not even the Government believed that the DBA 
Regulations were going to apply  to litigation funding agreements.  
99 The litigation which gave rise to the PACCAR Decision (the “ Trucks Dispute ”) arose in 
the Competition Appeals Tribunal (the “ CAT ”). It is not necessary for me to explain the 
background to those proceedings, save that the hearing in front of the CAT at which the 
issue of whether litigation funding agreements were Damages Based Agreements took 
35 
 place from  4 to 6 June 2019  (the “ Trucks Judgment (Funding)17”). The Trucks 
Judgment (Funding) was handed down on 28 October 2019 , and subsequently the same 
arguments regarding the status of litigation funding agreements were ventilated before the 
Court of Appeal in relation to an application by the defendants in the Trucks Dispute  for 
permission to appeal or alternatively for permission to bring proceedings for judicial 
review, a decision which was handed down on 5 March 2021 ( Paccar Inc. v RHA and UKTC  
[2021] EWCA Civ 299  (the “ PACCAR  Court of Appeal Decision ”)).18 
100 Both of these decisions made it clear  that arguments  about the status of litigation funding 
agreements at DBAs were ‘live’ and  had been  published in high profile judgments since 
late 2019. Both  the Trucks Judgment (Funding)  and the PACCAR Court of Appeal 
Decision also refer to an article published in the Cambridge Law Journal in 2014, by 
Professor Rachel Mulheron , title d “England's unique approach to the self -regulation of third party 
funding: a critical analysis of recent developments ” (the “ Mulheron  Analysis”)19 (pages  520-553). 
The Mulheron Analysis,  in my view , contains a thorough  breakdown of the primary 
arguments which would, several years later, be advanced by the defendant parties  in the 
lead up to the Trucks Judgment (Funding) , and later by those same parties  in their 
application to the Supreme Court . 
101 In particular, Prof. Mulheron  expends several pages on a detailed analysis of question of 
whether  litigation funders, according t o the rules of statutory interpretation, provide “ claims 
management services ”, as defined in section 58AA of the CLSA 1990.  While she concedes that 
the drafting of the relevant provisions may give rise to a degree of uncertainty, she 
concludes that “the author considers that any application which sought to render a LFA unenforceable 
because it did not meet the requirements of the DBA Regulations 2013 would be bound to fail. ” 
Professor Mulheron also noted that the possibility that funding agreements were caug ht 
by the DBA Regulations 2013 had been “ ventured in some quarters since the implementation of the 
 
17 https://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/CAT/2019/26.html  
18 https://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/2021/299.html , at paragraph 80(2)  “The Tribunal next pointed out that the 
argument now advanced by DAF "is not altogether novel": see [37]. In particular, the issue was raised by Professor Rachel Mul heron, 
who is "one of the leading academics in the field of civil procedure", in an influent ial article in the Cambridge Law Journal in 2014: see 
England's unique approach to the self regulation of third party funding: a critical analysis of recent developments [2014] CL J 570 at 
592-595. Although Professor Mulheron considered the argument to be i ncorrect, she suggested that for the sake of clarity the legislation 
should be amended .” 
19 [2014] C.L.J. 570, 590 -96. 
36 
 DBA Regulations 2013 ”.20 The author also notes that the debate “ has been the subject of comment 
at several conferences since the Jackson reforms took effect .”21 
102 While I understand that Professor Mulheron reached the conclusion that litigation funding 
agreements were very unlikely to qualify as damages based agreement s, this very clearly 
shows that the arguments raised by the parties to the PACCAR Decision were not novel, 
and could  have been run on behalf of  the Orb Claimants , Dr Cochrane , or any other party 
to these proceedings .  
103 I also note that in an open  letter to the Lord Chancellor of 16 April 2024  (pages 554-555), 
to which Mr Thomas and Dr Smith appended their signatures  and which sought to 
persuade the Government not to introduce  the retrospective aspects of the Litigation 
Funding (Enforceability) Bill , the authors concede that “ The law has always been that litigation 
funders provide claims management services and therefore their LFAs are DBAs (provided Section 
58AA(3) of the CLSA 1990 is engaged) and are subject to regulatio n. The Supreme Court in 
PACCAR simply confirmed this position. That the point had not been judicially considered before is 
irrelevant: Professor Rachel Mulheron (whose views the litigation funders will be well aware) first raised 
the point almost a decade ago.” 
104 Despite Professor Mulheron’s conclusions, she and those working with her clearly 
remained concerned that greater clarity was required in this area, and undertook to engage 
with the Civil Justice Council on a consultation called the Damages Based Agreements  
Reform Project, the conclusions of which were published in August 2015 (the “ CJC DBA 
Report ”).22 The aim of this consultation was to make recommendations to the government 
regarding revisions to the DBA Regulations 2013, with a view to the enactment of the 
DBA Regulations 2015.  
105 In the event, the DBA Regulations 2015 were never adopted. However, noting that while 
“it was extremely unlikely that Third Party Funders were inadvertently covered by the 2013 DBA 
Regulations … the intent of the Ministry of Justice to set any remote residual uncertainty about the point 
at nought was noted ”. The authors recommended specifically excluding litigation funders in 
the revised report.  
 
20 Mulheron Analysis, page 3, paragraph 1  
21 Ibid, footnote 140  
22 https://www.judiciary.uk/wp -content/uploads/2015/09/dba -reform -project -cjc-aug-2015.pdf  
37 
 106 I note that until mid-2016 , the Orb Claimants were represented by Stewarts Law, a firm 
with a very detailed understanding of litigation funding, and who were no doubt aware of 
the principles I outline above. It is also evident to me, however, that the Orb Claimants 
would have had n o commercial interest seeking to undermine the Harbour IA while they 
were represented by Stewarts. Harbour complied with the Harbour IA fully and provided 
the Orb claimants with around £5.2m of litigation funding.  
107 However, despite the deterioration of the relationship between the Orb Claimants and 
Harbour, which ultimately resulted in Harbour successfully establishing its rights under the 
Harbour IA at the Directed Trial, neither the Orb Claimants nor any other party sought to 
take up the argument that the Harbour IA was unenforceable on the basis that it was a 
DBA that did not comply with the DBA Regulations 2013  at any point before or during 
the Directed Trial. Their opportunities to do so were extremely extensive,  given the lengthy 
nature of these proceedings. I set out at Annex  1 a timetable of the relevant procedural 
steps in these proceedings. This clearly shows that the Orb Claimants have had numerous 
opportunities to advance an argument as to the enforceability of the Harbour IA , from 
mid-2017 (when the first “ assets and claims position papers” were produced by the parties, 
including the Orb Claimants) until July 2021 when the opportunity to appeal the 
Consequentials Order expired.  
108 In particular, the Orb Claimants had multiple  opportunities during the lead up to the 
Directed Trial to advance claims in respect of the validity of the Harbour IA , including : 
108.1  Five C ase Management Conference ( CMC ) hearings. The purpose of three of those 
CMCs was to establish the scope of assets and issues to be determined at the 
Directed Trial.  
108.2  Pursuant to court order s, at least three requirements for parties to file statements 
outlining their position, including by way of a statement of case or position paper, 
and consequential amendments to the same. Applications to amend parties’ 
pleadings were being made as late as 31 December 2020  following the PTR , at 
which  time LCL (one of the Smith Parties)  applied to amend its statement of case.  
108.3  Witness statements of fact, both trial witness statements and those in respect of 
interlocutory applications such as,  for example , the guillotine hearing that 
culminated in the assets being identified as the subject matter of the Directed Trial.  
38 
 108.4  The Directed Trial itself, which spanned 7 weeks, represented a significant 
opportunity for the Orb Claimants to advance their position. It should be noted 
that during the trial period, extensive submissions on a wide range of issues were 
put forward by numerous parties to the litigation , in some instances for the first 
time. No stone was left unturned, and all matters raised were exhaustively 
deliberated.  
109 I note also that Harbour’s Statement of Case in these proceedings  of 29 November 2017  
stated at paragraph 7 that “ Harbour intends to rely upon the Harbour Funding Agreement in these 
proceedings for its full terms and true effect ”. It went on at paragraph 15 to state that “ Harbour 
entered into the Harbour Funding Agreement in good faith, in the ordinary course of business and on 
ordinary terms (including terms as to its remuneration and success fee )…”. 
110 In response, Messrs Thomas and Taylor in their Responsive Statement of Case of 28 July 
2019 , at paragraph 24, stated that “ These Respondents accept a s accurate in all material respects  the 
summary of the Harbour Funding Agreement  given in paragraphs 5 to 16  of Harbour’s Statement of 
Case dated 29 November 2017… ” 
111 It is notable that t he SFO’s  responsive statement of case  of 12 June 2018  stated at 
paragraph 13 that “ Harbour is required to prove  paragraphs 15 and 16  [of its Statement of Case] . 
No admissions are made as to the validity and enforceability of the Harbour Investment Agreement ”. 
112 Harbour’s Amended Responsive Statement of Case  of 10 April 2019, stated at paragraph s 
7 and 8:  
“7. Harbour relies on the Harbour Funding Agreement as the foundation for its claim under the Harbour 
Trust: see paras 5 -27 of its SOC. The Viscount supports Harbour’s case in relation to the Harbour 
Funding Agreement at paras 55 -65 of her SOC …. 
8. As for the contentions advanced by certain other Interested  Parties in relation to the Harbour Funding 
Agreement : 
a. It is noted t hat no Interested Party challenges the validity of the Harbour Funding Agreement …” 
113 It is clear that the validity and enforceability of the Harbour IA was relied upon  by Harbour  
from  the outset of these proceedings, and that no party  chose to actively challenge 
Harbour’s position. It is entirely unsurprising, therefore, that the Directed Trial did not  
need expressly to confirm that status . 
39 
 114 Accordingly, the Smith Parties have had ample opportunities to argue that the Harbour IA  
was subject to the DBA regulations and failed to do so. I would respectfully suggest that 
these matters are res judicata, or give rise to cause of action or issue estoppel, or that it 
would be abusive , for reasons that will be expanded upon in submissions, for them to be 
allowed to do so now.  
I. The Severability of the Harbour IA  
115 Given  the PACCAR Decision , if the above points do not determine the matter in 
Harbour’s favour, there appears to be a risk that the Harbour IA  would be found by a 
court to be a non -compliant DBA.  I note, however, that t he Harbour IA also includes a 
clause headed “Severability”, which provides that:  
“If any term or provision in this Agreement shall in whole or in part be held to any extent to be illegal or 
unenforceable under any enactment or rule of law, that term or provision or part shall to that extent be 
deemed not to form part of this Agreement a nd the enforceability of the remainder of this Agreement shall 
not be affected ”. 
116 It is my understanding that the percentage -based recovery provisions in Schedule 2  are 
capable of being severed , such that the agreement remains enforceable . I do not seek to 
make submissions in this witness statement  as to the legal position in respect of 
sever ability . However I will , for the Court’s convenience,  set out below my understanding 
of how this would operate in practice.  
117 Harbour’s entitlement in respect of any proceeds up to £40 million is  calculated on a n 
alternative basis , depending on when such proceeds are received. In respect of this 
agreement, the initial period in respect of proceeds received either 6 or 12 months after  
the agreement was signed, expired in 10 July 201 3, over 10 years ago.  
118 The final two rows are intended to determine Harbour’s recoveries if the proceeds exceed 
£40 million, and are calculated on a percentage basis only. It is also worth noting, although 
not a necessary factor in this exercise, that Harbour does not expect the proceeds to exceed 
£40 million , indeed they  are likely to be significantly less , not least because the costs of the 
relevant office holders charged with realising the assets have been significantly inflated by 
the actions of the Smith Parties since the Di rected Trial .  
40 
 119 As long ago as 2 July 2021, not long after the Directed Trial Judgment, my firm wrote to 
Messrs Thomas and Taylor setting out the likely proceeds, including estimated values of 
the relevant assets (which are now signifi cantly out of date, and which are likely to be 
significantly reduced as at today’s date)  (pages 556-563). We also made it clear that 
Harbour expected its minimum return to be calculated on the basis of the multiples 
included in Schedule 2. It should be  noted that the Orb Claimants  (Messrs Tho mas and 
Taylor in particular) have on several occasions asserted that they expect the proceeds to 
be considerably more than £40 million. In any event , I respectfully suggest that  such 
dispute is not material at this stage.  
120 It is Harbour’s belief that  the sections of Schedule 2  which contain a percentage based 
recovery can be severed from the Harbour IA, to the extent that they are “illegal or 
unenforceable” , in accordance with the severability provisions of the agreement . This is a 
straightforward exercise in contractual in terpretation which does not require reference to 
the general common law principles concerning severance , or to satisfy th e general common 
law test . In particular , in the contractual interpretation context  the court is not limited to 
deletions, it does not matter whether there is surplus language left over  and there is no 
need to consider  whether  the overall balance of the contract  remains the sa me.  
121 However, Harbour also intends to argue in the alternative that the general common law 
test can be satisfied in any event . I set out below  another version of Schedule 2  which 
demonstrates where such  modifications are necessary (the “ Modified Schedule 2 ”). I 
note also that in pre -action correspondence, having received the draft of this Application, 
Marriot Harrison has indicated that Mr Thomas disagrees with Harbour application of the 
principles of severability in  respect of the proposed Modified Schedule 2.  These objections 
would only appear to have application to the common law approach not the exercise in 
contractual interpretation referred to above.  Harbour reserves its position in this regard, 
including  as to the further modification of Schedule 2  and any arguments about how the 
surviving wording may be interpreted , pending receipt of Mr Thomas’s responsive 
evidence.  
41 
  
122 It is my understanding  that, for severance to be possible  at common law , three 
requirements must be satisfied:  
122.1  First, it must be possible to remove the offending language without adding to or 
modifying other language (known as the “ Blue Pencil Test”)23; 
122.2  Second, the resulting contract must be supported by adequate consideration; and  
 
23 Harbour reserves its position, should the matter go on appeal to the Supreme Court, as to whether the 
requirements of the Blue Pencil Test itself remain appropriate.  

42 
 122.3  Third, the resulting contract must not be of a different nature to the original 
agreement, such that it is not the sort of contract that the parties entered into at 
all. 
123 As to the Blue Pencil Test, I would respectfully suggest to the Court  that the Modified 
Schedule 2  provisions are workable, and do not require any re -writing or amendment in 
order to be understood.  In fact, they  read as plain English, as if the severed provisions had 
never been included.  The nature of the agreement has not changed . 
124 The only other passage in the Harbour IA which refers to Harbour’s entitlement to a 
percentage of proceeds is contained within Clause 10 .2(e): 
“10.2 Where, pursuant to clause 4.2(i), the Claimants receive a recommendation from the Legal 
Representatives to accept an offer of Settlement made on behalf of one or more Defendants (the 
"Recommended Offer") but the Claimants elect to reject the Recommended Offer, if the Proceeds eventually 
recovered from such Defend ant or Defendants are less than the amount of the Recommended Offer, the 
Claimants shall hold such Proceeds on bare Trust absolutely for the benefit of HF2 and the Claimants 
and to the extent of their interests as Trust Beneficiaries The Claimants shall ad ditionally keep such 
Proceeds separate from the Claimants' own funds and shall apply the Proceeds received as a result of Success 
in the Proceedings in the following order upon receipt of such Proceeds:  
(a) deduct all stamp duties, bank charges and currency exchange costs payable by the  
Claimants relating to or arising out of any such Success in the Proceedings;  
 (b) pay to HF2 the HF2 Investment;  
  (c) pay any other sums due in respect of Claimants' Legal Costs;  
(d) pay to the Legal Representatives, Barristers or other third parties with whom the 
Claimants have concluded a Legal Costs Agreement any success fee or costs uplift payable 
under any such Legal Costs Agreement;  
(e) pay to HF2 any amount due to it in its capacity as Trust Beneficiary pursuant to  
Schedule 2 save that the percentage of Proceeds payable to HF2 shall be calculated by  
reference to the amount of the Recommended Offer and not by reference to the amount o f 
the Proceeds; and  
43 
 (f) pay to the Claimants any remaining amount which the Claimants shall receive in 
their capacity as Trust Beneficiaries .” 
125 All that is required in this section of the agreement is the deletion of the second half of 
Clause 10.2(e), from the words “ save that ” to the end of the clause and in any event Clause 
10.2(e) has no relevance to the current situation . Again , the balance of the clause remains 
entirely coherent , without any further amendments necessary.  
126 I note that the Thomas Letter Before Action also refers to the provisions of Clause 14 of 
the Harbour IA . I understand the implication of the letter to be that , according to Mr 
Thomas,  Clause 14.4(a)(ii)  of the Harbour IA also contains provisions that cause Harbour’s 
return to be “determined by reference to the amount of the financial benefit obtained by the recipient ”, in 
accordance with the third of the DBA requirements of the CLSA 1990. However, I do not 
believe this to be the case  (and again it has no relevance to the current situation) . 
127 Clause 14 .4 reads as follows:  
“14.4 In the event that the Claimants continue with the Proceedings after the Termination Date and the 
Claimants subsequently Succeed in such Proceedings, the Claimants agree on a joint and several basis that:  
(a) they will hold all Proceeds on bare Trust absolutely for the Claimants and HF2 and 
to the extent of their interests as Trust Beneficiaries, such Proceeds will be kept separate 
from the Claimants' own funds and the Claimants shall as trustee of the Trus t forthwith 
pay to HF2 an amount from the Proceeds corresponding to:  
 (i) the HF2 Investment up to the Termination Date; and   
 (ii) a sum calculated by applying 10% per annum on the amounts referred 
to in subclause 14.4(a)(i), calculated from the date of each payment out (or 
assumption of liability for Adverse Costs) by HF2 to the date of refund 
to HF2 by the Claimants.  
(b) The provisions of clauses 8 and 9 and payment to HF2 under the Trust, will 
apply as if this Agreement had continued in force, SAVE THAT the amount of 
Proceeds payable to HF2 under Schedule 2 shall be fixed by reference to the 
Termination Date and not t he date of receipt of monies by HF2 following Success 
in the Proceedings; and  
44 
 (c) the Claimants shall not be obliged to make payments to HF2 under the terms 
of this Trust that are more than the Proceeds it recovers.  
For the avoidance of doubt, this clause 14.4 shall survive any termination of this Agreement .” 
128 Although the Thomas Letter Before Action does not clearly set out the basis of Mr 
Thomas’s assertion in relation to this provision, I assume that  Mr Thomas’s case is that a 
reference in 14.4(a)(ii) to a sum of 10% per annum due to Harbour  renders this clause a 
DBA provision in that by its nature a percentage  is determined by to a separate figure. 
However, the figure which determines the  amount of the  percentage due in this instance 
is Harbour’s investment, rather than the amount of any proceeds.  This is eff ectively a 
provision for Harbour to recover interest on its investment in the instance that the 
Harbour IA is terminated before proceeds are received by the Orb Claimants. Therefore 
by definition , if this clause were to be invoked, the Orb Claimants would have not yet 
received any financial benefit for Harbour’s return to be calculated by reference to. I do 
not understand the third criterion of the  CLSA 1990  to be intended to refer to this scenario, 
therefore there is no need to consider the severance of this provision.  
129 Finall y, I also understand Mr Thom as to intend to argue that  the provisions of part of 
Clause 9 of the Harbour IA  would render the agreement a DBA, specifically  Clause 9.3.  
Mr Thomas’s position has not been made completely clear in correspondence , and as such  
Harbour reserves its position and  will respond more fully in due course if necessary .  
130 As to the second requirement  of the severability test , which is that the resulting contract 
should still be supported by adequate consideration, I would respectfully suggest that this 
would be satisfied. Harbour  would still be providing consideration by way of its promise 
to provide funding to the Orb Claimants  (and the provision of funding) , and the Orb 
Claimants would be providing consideration by way of their promise to hold on trust the 
Proceeds on Success, and to pay to Harbour, out of those proceeds, (1) the amount of the 
investment and (2) a return, calculated now as a multiple of Harbour’s investment . 
131 As to the third requirement (that the nature of the agreement should not be altered such 
that it becomes quite different to that originally agreed), as I outline above, the Harbour 
IA only requires  amend ment  in very limited respects . The essence of the agreement 
remains unchanged , namely that Harbour agree d to fund the Orb Claimants in exchange 
45 
 for a return should Proceeds be recovered. The potential change in Harbour’s entitlement  
is a matter of degree, and not a change in the inherent commercial nature of the agreement .  
132 In the alternative, Harbour’s case will be that at a bare minimum, its contractual right to 
repayment of the investment (plus interest at 10% per annum as stipulated in  clause  17.1 
of the Harbour IA )24 remains unimpaired. This is specified in Cl 9.1(b) , and is unaffected 
by any finding that the return elements of the Harbour IA are unenforceable.  
133 I note that the severance approach is not the only available analysis  of how to deal with 
statutory unenforceability. It will be a matter of submission as to whether it is the correct 
framework within which to assess the issue, as opposed, by way of example only, to an 
interpretation of the Harbour IA which locates the DBA within  a confined portion of the 
larger whole and which does not have effects outside of that portion.  
134 Finally, Mr Thomas has suggested that  even if Harbour’s case on severa nce succeeds, the 
resulting agreement must somehow conform to the requirements of the CLSA 1990.  Mr 
Thomas has not explained this principle and as such it would be premature for Harbour’s 
position to be fully developed  here.  That said , Harbour  would consider the starting point 
to be  that if the Harbour IA is no t a DBA  following one of the approaches  as set out 
above , it is not required to meet any criteria set out in S.58AA of the CLSA 1990.  
J. Harbour’s detrimental reliance on the Harbour IA  
135 Harbour  has detrimentally relied  upon  its understanding that the Harbour IA was an 
enforceable agreement which conferred upon it particular proprietary rights . In these 
proceedings, as I note above, H arbour  funded the Orb Claimants  in the amount of 
approximately £5.2 million, and has since spent several times that amount enforcing its 
rights under the Harbour IA.   
136 In total, Harbour has expended approximately £ 16.7 million  (including amounts advanced 
by Harbour to the Viscount) as of the date of this evidence , and expects to expend 
considerably more on dealing with further actions which have been initiated by the Smith 
Parties.  Additionally, the continuing efforts of the Smith Parties  and other related 
individuals  to resist the work of court -appo inted office holders w ill further inflate  the costs 
 
24 Harbour's position is that contractual  interest also accrues pursuant to clause 17.1 in respect of its entire entitlement , 
including returns on its investment provided for in Schedule 2 of the Harbour IA, should the court find in its favour 
on this application.  
46 
 associated with managing and realising  the assets which were the subject of the Directed 
Trial and depress ultimate recoveries . 
137 The other Settlement Parties submitted their relevant  costs to the Court at the time of the 
costs consequentials hearing following the Directed Trial. These represent only a partial 
picture of the total costs that those parties have expended , as they reflected only their legal 
costs incurred during the Directed Trial , i.e. to 2021 . These totals have undoubtedly 
increased significantly in the subsequent years (including a total of around £1.16 million 
expended by the Settlement Parties in the context of the Part 8 Claim).  
137.1  Stewarts Law: £2.3 million  
137.2  The Viscount: £2.5 million  
137.3  The SFO: £1.8 million  
137.4  The Joint Liquidators: £3.4 million  
137.5  The Enforcement Receivers: £3.8 million  
K. Limitation  
138 Harbour will also submit that, as determined in the Directed Trial, Harbour’s right to 
recovery under the Harbour IA was engaged (at the latest) on 29 April 2016, at the time of 
execution of a settlement between Dr Smith, Dr Cochrane and Mr Andrew Ruhan (t he 
“Geneva Settlement ”) (the Confidential Deed, which is one of the Geneva Settlement 
documents is at pages 564-568), which brought to an end the Orb Litigation (which was 
itself dismissed by way of consent order on 5 May 2016).  
139 As such, the time period for the Orb Claimants to contend that the Harbour IA was 
unenforceable began at the date of the Geneva Settlement, and ended in April 2022, well 
after the conclusion of the Directed Trial, and during the period in which the Orb 
Claimants’ c hallenges to the Directed Trial Judgment were well underway.  
140 Harbour’s limitation submissions will be developed in due course, but I also note here that, 
as I set out above, the potential arguments regarding the applicability of the DBA 
Regulations 2013 to the Harbour IA were publicly available since around the time  of the 
Mulheron Analysis in 2014. As such, the Orb Claimants could have discovered the basis 
47 
 for their potential cause of action at any time from that point in 2014 onwards, and 
certainly by April 2016.  
141 For the purposes of this evidence, I have sought to apply a convention al 6-year limitation 
period. Harbour’s position in this regard is reserved pending the full articulation by Mr 
Thomas of the relief he seeks , which depends on how he frames his case as to the basis 
for any right of recovery  – obviously different limitation periods may apply depending on 
how this is put . This reservation also extends to Harbour’s right to argue that Mr Thomas 
is barred  by laches  from  obtaining the relief he seeks , in the circumstances of this case, 
whether or not a limitation period applies to the relief he seeks . 
142 Finally,  in pre -action correspondence, Marriott Harrison has indicated that Mr Thomas 
intends to argue that should his action be time barred, the same should apply to this 
application by Harbour. Harbour’s position will be developed in submission in due course, 
but I note that this appears to be a misconceived interpretation of the relief sought by 
Harbour in this application. Primarily, Harbour seeks declaration s that Mr Thomas, Dr 
Cochrane or any other party’s actions to  undermine the Harbour IA are abusi ve or 
incorrect, and only if Harbour does not succeed on those grounds, that those parties’ 
applications are time -barred  in terms of advancing the substantive arguments . 
L. Dr Cochrane’s standing  and the Debarring/Stay Directions  
143 As she was declared en désastre  in November 2016 , Dr Cochrane’s personal interests in 
these proceedings have been represented by the Viscount . I note, however, that Dr 
Cochrane executed the LCL Settlement Deed in her personal capacity.  
144 In the circumstances, without prejudice to its rights more generally,  Harbour is prepared 
to take a pragmatic position and would not object to Dr Cochrane being permitted to 
address the Court on the matters dealt with in this application .  
145 Given th e Thomas Letter Before Action, it seems that Mr Thomas is likely to seek to  
oppose  Harbour’s application  and seek relief that is relevant to  the other  Orb Claimants 
as well as himself . In this regard,  Harbour ’s position  is that Mr Thomas remains bound by 
and must comply , in full,  with the terms  of the Debarring/Stay  Directions  before  any 
application or request for relief he makes can proceed.  
M. Conclusions  
48 
 146 I respectfully submit that Harbour’s present application should be granted on one or more 
of the bases I set out above.  
147 Subject to the Court’s approach in relation to, and determination of,  the above matters, 
further issues may need to be addressed or raised, or directions given, in respect of which 
Harbour’s position is fully reserved. These include, for example : (a) whether the Guarantee 
entered into between Harbour and Dr Cochrane renders Dr Cochrane liable for any 
unenforceable obligations under the Harbour IA in any event , and whether Harbour can 
hold Dr Cochrane, Mr Thomas and Mr Taylor liable for breach of the represe ntations and 
warranties at Cl 3.1(g) of the Harbour IA under which they promised that the obligations 
assumed were “legal, valid, binding and enforceable obligations” in the amount of any 
reduction to Harbour’s entitlement ; (b) whether Harbour can nevertheless uphold its rights 
on alternative bases, such as proprietary estoppel, constructive or resulting trusts, unjust 
enrichment or equitable allowance , or the survival of the Harbour Trust even in the event 
that the Harbour IA is found to be unenforceable i n whole or in part ; and (c) the impact 
of any of these determinations on the position of other parties to the proceedings.  I 
mention these only for completeness, to make it clear that the points I have mentioned 
above (and which Harbour considers should be sufficient to dispose of the various 
complaints and attacks which have been intimated) may not be the only arguments 
available to Harbour to protect its position, although I hope that it will not prove necessary 
for the parties to take up further court ti me in relation to this matter . 
 
STATEMENT OF TRUTH  
I believe that the facts stated in this witness statement are true. I understand that proceedings for 
contempt of court may be brought against anyone who makes, or causes to be made, a false 
statement in a document verified by a statement of truth without an honest belief in its truth.  
Signed……  …………………………………  
Name: Adam Karim Zoubir  
Date …… 31 October 2024 ……………………………….   

49 
 ANNEX 1  
Opportunities for parties to  have raised arguments based upon the DBA Regulations 2013  during these 
proceedings  
 
No Date  Event/ Relevant Order  
1.  6 March 2017  
 
 
24 April 2017  CMC hearing before Popplewell J  
 
Assets and Claims Position Papers: Pursuant to Popplewell J’s order 
dated 6 March 2017, the parties were required to lodge position papers 
setting out their case.  
 
2.  26 June 2017  CMC hearing  
 
The SFO and Enforcement Receivers apply for a determination of the 
extent to which the Shares and the Jersey Properties (as defined therein) are 
realisable property of Dr Smith.  
  
3.  28 June 2017  Order by Popplewell J  
 
Pursuant to paragraph 8, parties were  required to serve a statement of case 
which, amongst other things, “provides particulars of the claim(s) or issue(s) which it 
contends can conveniently be disposed of together with or within the SFO Application” . 
 
4.  6 and 7 
December 
2017 Directions Hearing  
 
5.  7 December 
2017 Popplewell J Order  
 
Each party was required to file a brief document identifying any other 
Interested Party’s claim that was accepted, and to the extent not, the reasons 
why not (if this was not already set out in that party’s assets and claims 
position paper).  
 
This presented another opportunity to advance this position.  
 
6.  24 April 2018  Popplewell J Order  
 
Pursuant to paragraph 9(c) of the Order, any Participating Party (including 
Dr Cochrane ) was given the opportunity to file a responsive statement to 
any other Participating Party’s case.  
 
7.  25, 26 and 27 
February 
2019 CMC Hearing  
8.  29 March 
2019 Moulder J order  
 
The parties were required to give disclosure relevant to the issues in the case  
9.  24 February 
2020 CMC hearing before Foxton J  
 
This CMC took place following the Settlement Agreement being entered 
into by the Settlement Parties.  
Again, this represented another opportunity for the Orb Claimants  to put 
forward their position, either in the hearing or in correspondence.  
50 
  
10.  18 May 2020  Guillotine hearing before Foxton J determining the scope of underlying 
assets.  
 
11.  27 and 28 
July 2020  CMC hearing before Foxton J  
12.  11 December 
2020 Pre-trial review before Foxton J  
13.  8 January 
2021 The parties to the Directed Trial submitted skeleton arguments  
14.  19 January 
2021 to 9 
March 2021  The Directed Trial before Foxton J  
 
 
15.  10-11 June 
2021 Consequentials Hearing  
16.  Appeal 
period  The Consequentials Order of Foxton J dated 11 June 2021  
 
Paragraph 34 of this order permitted applications for permission to appeal 
to be made to the Court of Appeal by 2 July 2021. No applications were 
made by the Orb Claimants.  
 
 
51 
 Appendix 1  
Chronology of e vents relating to the activities of Dr Smith -associated parties following the Directed Trial Judgment  
 
Date  Event  Relevant 
Smith 
Party  Description  
Ongoing 
(from 
October 
2021)  Non-Cooperation by Dr Cochrane in 
respect of Shares in Casa Coloniches 
B.V. (“ Casa Coloniches ”) 
 Dr 
Cochrane  Dr Cochrane has been consistently non -cooperative regarding the transfer of the share of Casa 
Coloniches , a Non Arena Company over whose shares the the Enforcement Receivers are 
appointed. Her actions include initially refusing to sign transfer documents for the shares, 
initially refusing  to appoint the Enforcement Receivers  as directors and sign other documents 
and indicating an intention to oppose the Attorney General of Jersey's representation to vary 
the saisie judiciaire made by the Royal Court of Jersey on 24 November 2016 to permit the 
transfer of shares in Casa Coloniches  to the Enforcement Receivers  which has caused, and 
continues to cause,  significant  delay and cost.25 
 
Ongoing 
(from 
February 
2021)  Obstruction by associates of Smith in 
bringing claims against companies 
controlled by the Enforcement 
Receivers and opposing the 
recognition of the Enforcement 
Receivers and Directed Trial 
Judgment in proceedings in the 
Republic of the Marshall Islands  Smith 
parties and 
Thomas  In February 2021, Simon Cooper and Simon McNally commenced claims against SMA and 
GACH (both Non -Arena Companies) in the Republic of the Marshall Islands which the 
Enforcement Receivers on behalf of SMA and GACH opposed. In April 2021, the 
Enforcement Rece ivers applied for recognition of their appointment. In June 2021, LCL sought 
to consent to a claim brought by Cooper and McNally that includer a transfer of the shares of 
the Non Arena Companies (determined in the Directed Trial to be held for Dr Smith and  
payable to Confiscation Order) to SMA and GACH, which the Smith parties (including Mr 
Thomas) claimed were not controlled by the Enforcement Receivers but by Thomas or entities 
connected with them. In November 2021, Minardi Investments Limited (then actin g by Smith 
associates) brought a further claim against SMA (acting by the Enforcement Receivers). The 
opposition to recognition of the Enforcement Receivers and the outcome of the Directed Trial 
continues , resulting in significant delay and costs26. 
 
25 Paragraph 5.7.2 of MR26  (pages 569-623, page  599) 
26 Paragraphs 5.2.7 and 5.2.8 of MR26  (page 585-586). 
52 
 March 
2022 
ongoing  Obstruction of vacant possession of 
Flats 11, 12, 19, 20 and 21 Hamilton 
House27 Certain of 
the LCL 
Parties  
 Dr Smith, Robert Morris, Imogen Smith and Iona Smith, all parties to the LCL Settlement 
Agreement , were required to give vacant possession of these flats, pursuant to its terms. Despite 
notice being given  to them by the Enforcement Receivers , vacant possession was actively 
resisted, including by way of court applications, causing significant  cost and  delay.  
As noted above, despite vacant possession having ultimately been obtained by the Enforcement 
Receivers, Dr Smith has again claimed rights over these properties, as a result of the PACCAR 
decision.  
11 May 
2022 Part 8 Claim commenced by Messrs 
Thomas and Taylor by which they 
sought to appoint Mr Ticehurst as 
trustee of the Harbour Trust for an 
improper purpose “the Part 8 
Claim ”) 
 Thomas  As part of their efforts to frustrate the Directed Trial, Messrs Thomas and Taylor (with the 
support and funding of Smith and his associates) sought to enforce certain rights as trustees of 
the trust arising out of the Harbour Investment Agreement  by way of a Part 8 claim . Despite  a 
previous  indication from Foxton J that Messrs Thomas and Taylor were not suitable trustees, 
given their prior unlawful receipt of trust funds, they acted in direct contravention of the Judge’s 
indications by both seeking to act as trustees, and by improperly appointing a further trustee 
(Mr Ticehurst) .  
After a further trial which took place in late 2022, again in front of Foxton  J, Messrs Thomas 
and Taylor were found to have been acting in concert with Smith and against the interests of 
the principal beneficiaries of the Harbour Trust, and were removed as trustees. All of Messrs 
Thomas and Taylors’ arguments failed, the Settlement Parties were forced to incur significant 
additional costs of over £1m, and the additional litigation caused a significant delay in the 
ongoing enforcement efforts of the Office Holders.  
 
20 June 
2022 Contempt Application against Mr 
Thomas   The Enforcement Receivers filed a contempt application against Mr Thomas28 on the following 
grounds:  
 
• Inciting LCL to purport to transfer its shares in SMA and GACH to the “joint trustees 
of the Orb Claimants Trust ”; 
• Purporting to accept board appointments for SMA and GACH; and  
• Purporting to act as a director of SMA and GACH by agreeing to stay the RMI 
proceedings . 
 
27 Please see footnote 7 of 4.3.1.2 of the 6th Receivership Order R eport dated 12 July 2024 ( pages 624-663, page 63 5) 
28 Paragraph 4.2.12 of MR25  (pages 664 – 716, page 67 9) 
53 
  
Ultimately, Mr Thomas  carried out the actions required by the Enforcement Receivers, and the 
contempt application was compromised with costs ordered in favour of the Enforcement 
Receivers.  
29 July 
2022 29 July 2022 Dr Smith contempt of 
court conviction  Dr Smith  Dr Smith was convicted of contempt of court in July 2022 in respect of breaches of a restraint 
order obtained by the SFO, which restricted his access to certain bank accounts. Dr Smith was 
found guilty of three counts of contempt and given an eight -month prison sentence, suspended 
for 18 months.29  
2022 SMA Application  Smith 
parties  Attempts made by the Smith Parties, via companies called Minardi  and BKV, to prevent the 
transfer of the shares of SMA to newly appointed trustees of the Harbour Trust ;. Foxton J 
rejected those efforts in a Judgment dated 28 February 2023 ([2023] EWHC 428 (Comm)) (the 
“SMA Judgment ”) which found amongst other things that:  
“19. I have no doubt that the approach taken by those behind Minardi and those behind BKV (to extent that 
they are different), was co -ordinated, and represented a calculated attempt to delay the hearing and the orders 
which the Harcus Parker Parties seek. Those  individuals should be in no doubt as to the importance which the 
court attaches to ensuring that its processes are not misused and its orders are complied with, and the full range 
of the court's powers to serve these ends … 
103. As will be apparent from the foregoing, there is a real risk in this case that individuals who are bound by, 
but unhappy with, the outcome of the Directed Trial have been and are continuing to instigate proceedings and 
applications in these proceeding s and elsewhere to challenge the outcome of the Directed Trial or by way of a 
collateral attack on its conclusions. The scale of these activities and the legal costs and court time they are 
consuming, mean that considerable vigilance will be required on th e court's part to ensure that its judgments are 
respected and its processes are not abused.  
104. If activities of this kind continue, there will need to be careful consideration of a number of matters, including:  
i) whether there are any individuals who may have breached court orders and undertakings and, if so, whether 
the court's committal jurisdiction should be engaged;  
 
29 Paragraph 3.4.3 of MR 26 (page 581). The court’s decision is summarised in this link: Convicted fraudster found to be in contempt of court - Serious Fraud Office (sfo.gov.uk)   
54 
 ii) whether officers of the court should be given control of any companies which have changed hands in questionable 
circumstances, and which are being used in this process;  
iii) whether further injunctions could or should be granted against individuals where there is a sufficiently arguable 
case that they are engaged in activities intended to challenge a judgment which is binding upon them;  
iv) the consequences of undischarged costs orders in the litigation to date; and  
v) who has been funding these various applications and whether any orders against the funding parties or those 
controlling them would be appropriate.  
 
31 January 
2023 Assignment Application resulting in 
the Debarring/ Stay Order  Thomas  Despite Foxton J’s clear direction regarding further collusion and frustration, Messrs Thomas 
and Taylor sought to bring a further application against Harbour and the other Settlement 
Parties in early 2023. This application sought an order for the assignment of claims to certain 
assets identified in the Consequentials Order, currently under the control of office holders.  
 
Foxton J issued directions on 31 March 2023  to the effect that Thomas and Taylor were not 
permitted to bring any further actions against the Settlement Parties without attending a 
preliminary hearing related to whether their outstanding costs orders should first be satisfied, 
and that they would be  obliged to disclose the involvement of and/or funding provided by 
Smith and related parties , i.e. the Debarring/Stay Directions .  
29 March 
2023 Contempt Application made by Mr 
Sozawiczny  against Mr Thomas (Isle 
of Man Court)  Thomas  Mr Thomas has been found guilty of contempt of the Isle of Man High Court because, alongside 
a fellow director and associate of Dr Smith (a Mr Miah)  of an Isle of Man company, he failed 
to take steps (within his control which had been pointed out to him by the applicant) to remove 
a director of a subsidiary company that was in egregious and flagrant breach of an Isle of Man 
injunction protecting the a pplicant’s interest in property in Spain.  
Pursuant to a judgment dated 29 November 2023, Mr Thomas was held to have committed a 
contempt of court.  
 
August 
2023 - 
ongoing  Obstruction by Dr Cochrane and 
other Smith associates in respect of 
C’an Agata and Son Montserrat (the 
“Spanish Properties ”) Dr 
Cochrane  
Dr Smith  
Thomas  
Stickler  Two subsidiaries of Buena Vida Living 2 B.V ( “BVL2 ”), Conor and Agata, both hold registered 
title to the Spanish Properties.  
 
The Enforcement Receivers commenced eviction proceedings against Dr Cochrane and Mr 
Jansen (Dr Smith’s associate who purportedly occupied the property pursuant to an agreement 
55 
 with Dr Cochrane). This application succeeded in the Spanish Court in June 2023 and Dr 
Cochrane was ordered to pay 108,000 euros to Agata  (the "Spanish Judgment"), but her eviction 
was automatically suspended whilst she appealed the Spanish Judgment. In the end, the Spanish 
Court acceded to the Receivers (as directors of Agata) submission that Dr Cochrane's appeal 
should be struck out which  it was earlier this year. According to the Enforcement Receivers, 
Mr Thomas asserts that the shares of Agata and Conor  (or their proceeds) are (in some way) 
the property of the “Orb Claimants” held for the Harbour Trust.  
 
A summary of the extensive correspondence from Dr Cochrane who threatens litigation in 
respect of the Spanish Properties30, is as follows:  
 
On 11 August 2023, Dr Cochrane wrote to Bernardo Oliver, an architect who is engaged by 
the Receivers (as directors of Conor) in connection with the sale of Son Monserrat, noting Mr 
Oliver’s  conversation earlier that day with Dr Smith  and asserting:  
 
a. that the property and Conor are “hers” following their lawful transfer to her pursuant to the 
terms of the Isle of Man Settlement (with 62.5% owned by her and 37.5% owned by Messrs 
Thomas and Taylor);  
b. that Will Besga  of Mallorca Law SL (“Mallorca Law”) and the Enforcement Receivers had 
conspired to forge a shareholder resolution to remove Gail Cochrane and Ms Stickler as joint 
directors of Conor and Agata without their consent, with such forgery having been reported to 
the Mallorcan authorities and Miguel Games of Pinto Rui z & Del Valle having been instructed 
to bring proceedings against Mr Besga for fraud;  
c. that Mr Besga and the  Enforcement  Receivers’ actions in this regard were part of the wider 
“strategy of unlawful interference in the outcome of the Directed Trial that  Harbour Funding 
Limited… is unlawfully engaged in to purloin for itself and others the IOMS proceeds”; and  
d. that Mr Oliver should provide a written undertaking not to assist any party to purchase Son 
Monserrat without Dr Cochrane’s express written consent.  
 
On 15 August 2023, Dr Smith  wrote to the Receivers to assert that he had been “ asked to assist 
the Orb Claimants to finish the redevelopment of Son Monserrat and to refurbish C’an Agata ”, to confirm 
that he had moved into C’an Agata (without the Receivers’ consent as directors of Agata) and 
to request that the Receivers “ cease orchestrating interference”  with Agata and Conor.  
 
 
30 Paragraphs 4.6.10 to 4.6. 10.26 of MR24  (pages 717 – 768, pages 73 7 - 742). 
56 
 On 17 August 2023, Gail Cochrane wrote to the Viscount (copied to the Receivers) in response 
to a letter to Ogier (the Viscount's Jersey lawyers) claiming that:  
a. Conor, Agata and the Spanish Properties " are the property of the Orb Claimants ";  
b. "the purported role that Mr Milsom and Standish [Standisch] hold was obtained by fraud because they were 
purportedly appointed as directors of the Companies by Will Besga (a Mollorca attorney) on the basis of a 
purported shareholder resolution he forged (se e attached letter of 11 April 2023). A criminal action in Spain 
which is currently subject to litigation and censure before the courts of Palma " (sic);  
c. Bernardo Oliver was " my appointed architect "; and  
d. the Receivers have " no lawful role " and that " attempting to sell assets of the Orb Claimants, is 
tantamount to theft ". 
 
On 17 August 2023, Mr Thomas (in his  capacity as ‘a beneficiary’  of the Harbour Trust ) wrote 
to David Standish:  
a. querying whether the Spanish Properties are the subject of court orders and/or whether the 
assets have ever been subject to the English proceedings; and  
b. suggesting that 33% of the properties were "his" . 
 
On 21 August 2023 (at 11.30am), Dr Smith  wrote to the Receivers and repeated many of the 
unsubstantiated allegations made in Gail Cochrane’s letters of 11 and 17 August 2023 and 
threatening to commence proceedings in Spain against the Receivers and Mr Besga if the 
Receivers did not resign as dir ectors of Agata and Conor.  
 
The Enforcement Receivers provided robust responses to these letters on 21 August 2023.  
 
On 23 August 2023 (at 10.47am), Dr Cochrane wrote to the  Enforcement  Receivers alleging 
that their appointments as directors of Agata and Conor had occurred as a result of  a forged 
shareholder resolution, suggesting that the Receivers’ correspondence with her was “bullying, 
threatening and demeaning” and asserting that the  PACCAR  decision confirmed that the shares 
in Agata and Conor are the property of the Orb Claimants.  
 
On 30 August 2023, Gail Cochrane lodged an appeal against the Possession of C'an Agata 
Judgment.  
 
On 12 September 2023, Dr Smith wrote to the Enforcement Receivers asserting that the 
Directed Trial  has “ long since determined ” that the Orb Claimants own the shares of Agata and 
Conor.  
57 
  
On 19 September 2023, Ms Stickler emailed  the Enforcement Receivers’ lawyers  asserting that 
she is the “ only lawful director of Agata and Conor ” and repeating various of the above -noted 
assertions made by Dr Smith and Dr Cochrane regarding the Enforcement Receivers’ 
appointments as directors of Agata and Conor. She ignored the request to transfer the share in 
BVL2.  
 
On 28 September 2023, Mr Thomas wrote to the Receivers noting his intent to seek leave to 
appeal and set aside elements of the Consequentials Order, asserting that the Spanish Properties 
belong to the Orb Claimants and seeking the Receivers’ confirmation t hat no sale of Son 
Monserrat will proceed until Mr Thomas’ appeal has been determined and the Receivers “ have 
clarified with the court by application in the usual way, whether… they are… empowered to sell Son 
Monserrat …” 
 
In addition, Dr Cochrane and Dr Smith are claimed to have threatened the Receivers' agents in 
person, accused the Receivers' lawyer of forging a document, reported that lawyer and the 
Receivers to the criminal authorities in Mallorca, instructed the Receivers' lawyers,  agents and 
architect to cease acting and threatened legal proceedings against them in an attempt to prevent 
a sale. In the face of this behaviour, which was obstructive and in clear breach of court order, 
the Receivers ultimately concluded a sale of the property last year.  
 
As outlined above, after Dr Cochrane had refused to withdraw her appeal of the Spanish 
Judgment and written submissions were exchanged with the Court , on 18 April 2024, Foxton J 
issued a ruling that Dr Cochrane was bound by undertaking s she provided in the LCL 
Discontinuance Order, which prevented her from resisting the Enforcement Receivers’ efforts 
to realise the Spanish Properties.  
 
2 
December 
2023 Mr Sodzawiczny  and the Anti -
Arbitration Injunction  Dr 
Cochrane  
Dr Smith  Application made by Mr So dzawiczny  for an anti -arbitration injunction to prevent Dr Smith 
and Dr Cochrane from pursuing an LCIA Arbitration they purported to commence on 6 
December 2023.  
In his judgment dated 7 February 202431, Foxton J held the following:  
 
31 Sodzawiczny v Smith (Re Arbitration Claim) [2024] EWHC 231 (Comm) (07 February 2024) (bailii.org)  
58 
 “there is a real risk in this case that individuals who are bound by, but unhappy with, the outcome of the Directed 
Trial have been and are continuing to instigate proceedings and applications in these proceedings and elsewhere to 
challenge the outcome of the Di rected Trial or by way of a collateral attack on its conclusions…  
…I am satisfied that Dr Cochrane is acting wholly at Dr Smith’s direction and for his purposes in lending her 
name to the Smith RFA”.  
10 January 
2024 Slip Rule Application  Dr 
Cochrane  As described in further detail in the body of this witness statement, Dr Cochrane in filing this 
application sought to have two companies added to the list of 27 non -arena companies, and 
sought to have LCL and Orb removed from the list.  
8 July 
2024 Smith 
Restraint/ Receivership /Confiscation 
Order application  Dr Smith  Dr Smith served an application in these proceedings, challenging the SFO’s Restraint , 
Receivership  and Confiscation Order s.32 
11 July 
2024 Thomas Letter Before Action  Thomas  The letter before action, received on 11 July 2024, issued on behalf of Mr Thomas, intimates a 
challenge the validity of the Harbour IA based upon the PACCAR Decision.  
19 July 
2024 Dr Smith’s fraud conviction  Dr Smith  As recently as July 2024, Dr Smith was convicted of fraudulently obtaining a COVID -19 bounce 
back loan to the value of £50,000 for his personal use, by means of a fraudulent application. A 
portion of the funds he fraudulently obtained were used to pay costs orders owed to the SFO 
pursuant to an order made by Foxton J on 29 June 2020 .33  
 
20 
September 
2024 Dr Smith ’s fraud sentencing  Dr Smith  Dr Smith sentenced to 18 months’ imprisonment for Covid loan fraud  
Pending  Further contempt application against 
Dr Smith  Dr Smith  The SFO has filed a further application for GS’ committal to prison for contempt of court for 
further breaches of the Restraint Order and failing to comply with undertakings he gave in 
respect of Flats 11, 12 and 21 Hamilton House which were recorded in the LCL Discontinuance 
Order  of February 2021.  This application is supported by a 40 page witness statement from Mr 
Standish, as receiver appointed under the 2022 Receivership Order.  It is understood that Dr 
Smith’s solicitors, Berkeley Square Solicitors, re fused to accept service of the  application and 
on 27 March 2024, the SFO subsequently applied for such service to be deemed good service. 
I understand a final hearing has been listed for 29 and 30  October 2024.   
 
32 (pages 399 -435) 
33 https://www.cps.gov.uk/cps/news/businessman -found -guilty -government -backed -covid -19-bounce -back-loan-
fraud#:%7E:text=Businessman%20found%20guilty%20of%20Government%20backed%20COVID%2019%20bounce%20back%20loan%20fraud, -
19%20July%202024&text=An%20entrepreneu r%20was%20convicted%20today,be%20sentenced%20on%2020%20September  and ( pages 769-770). 
59 
 Appendix 2  
Background to Dr Cochrane’s Jersey Recall Applications  
 
The Jersey Recall Applications  
I. Administration application  
1 In the context of the Orb Claimants’ failure to honour the terms of the Harbour IA, as 
addressed in the Directed Trial Judgment,  Harbour issued formal demands in Jersey against 
Orb by letters dated 17 and 26 August 2016  (pages 771-779), and  pursuant to these 
demands,  Orb was informed that failing settlement, an application would be made for the 
appointment of an administrator.  
2 Following the formal demand upon Orb referred to above, Harbour applied to the Royal 
Court of Jersey (the “ Royal Court ”) for a letter of request to the English High Court 
seeking an administration order in respect of Orb.  The Royal Court's judgment on that 
application was dated 28 September 2016, Representation of Harbour v Orb [2016] JRC 
171 (“ the Administration Judgment ”) (pages 780-795). 
3 In paragraph 40 of the Administration J udgment, the Royal Court noted as follows: - 
“In her written responses to the formal demands made by Harbour, Dr Cochrane denies any debt being 
due by ORB to Harbour, although that denial is not repeated in her affidavit of 7th September, 2016, 
filed in response to Harbour’s application.  Indeed, and  perhaps significantly, she says nothing in that 
affidavit about Harbour’s claim or whether or not it is accepted by ORB.  Furthermore, in his skeleton 
argument, Advocate Nicholls, representing ORB, makes no reference at all to Harbour’s claim and whether 
or not it is accepted by ORB.  His submissions are limited entirely to the lack of any evidence of ORB 
having assets within England and Wales, a requisite, he says, for any letter of request to be issued.  
Advocate Nicholls did not appear at the hearing on  the 14th September, 2016, and therefore the Court 
was unable to press him on the point, but if ORB had a genuine defence to Harbour’s claim, it would be 
surprising in the extreme for that defence not to be mentioned, and indeed, given some prominence.”  
4 The Royal Court concluded that Harbour was a creditor of Orb with a liquidated claim 
and that Orb was cash flow insolvent. It nevertheless decided in its discretion not to issue 
a letter of request on the ground that, given Orb’s incorporation in Jersey an d other 
matters, a désastre  would be the preferable way of proceeding,  
II. Désastre application  
60 
 5 Following the Administration Judgment, Harbour made a formal demand on Dr Cochrane 
under the terms of her personal guarantee of the obligations of Orb that I describe above.   
6 It then applied for declarations of désastre  in respect of both Orb and Dr Cochrane.  The 
matter was heard inter partes on 24 November 2016.  The Royal Court granted the 
applications on 24 November 2016 for the reasons set out in a judgment dated 12 January 
2017, Harbour v Orb [2017] JRC 007 (“ the Désastre  Judgment ”) (pages 796-809). 
7 The Royal Court reminded itself (at para graph  13 of the Désastre  Judgment) that, in order 
for the Court to declare a désastre , a creditor must show that it has a liquidated claim (i.e. a 
certain debt which is not the subject of a genuine dispute or an arguable defence) which 
exceeds the minimum threshold of £3,000 and the creditor must also show that the debtor 
is insolvent (def ined as meaning ‘an inability to pay its debts as they fall due’ i.e. on a cash 
flow basis) but has realisable assets.  The Court said that its judgment should be read as a 
continuation of the Admi nistration judgment.  
8 As to whether Harbour was a creditor with a liquidated claim against Orb, at paragraphs 
19 - 21 of the Désastre  Judgment , the Royal Court held: 
“19.    Advocate Drummond, for Harbour, took the Court through a careful analysis, set out in his 
skeleton argument, of how Harbour’s liquidated claim arose under the Funding Agreement, the Isle of 
Man Agreement, and the 2014 Agreement, the latter presenti ng an insurmountable hurdle for ORB and 
Dr Cochrane in that by that Agreement, to which they were a party, they had agreed that the assets 
recovered by Dr Cochrane under the Isle of Man Agreement (at least £10m) would be treated as proceeds 
of the English proceedings Harbour had been funding, giving rise to an immediate liability on the part of 
ORB to repay the sums advanced, namely £5,189,010.48, just short of the aggregate amount Harbour 
was committed to fund under the funding agreement.”   
9 The Court held that Harbour was indisputably owed this sum by Orb and there was no 
reasonably arguable defence to that claim.  It further held that Dr Cochrane had no 
reasonably arguable defence to the claim against her in this sum pursuant to her guarantee.  
10 Having found that Orb had realisable assets, the Royal Court considered the position of 
Dr Cochrane at paragraph 32 of its judgment in the following terms:  
“In or around April 2016, Dr Cochrane signed a loan note in favour of Phoenix Group Foundation 
(“Phoenix”) in the sum of £73.75m in which she represents that she is the ultimate owner of a number of 
61 
 assets set out in Schedule 1 thereto.  She also said in her affidavit of 7th September 2016, “I am also 
privileged to be a very wealthy woman, with holdings in dozens of companies worldwide, including [ORB].”  
11 The Royal Court was satisfied that Dr Cochrane and Orb had realisable assets despite the 
appearance of a strategy to divert assets away from Orb.  
12 The Court then considered a submission that Orb had a counterclaim against Harbour in 
relation to the Harbour IA which it was entitled to set off against any debt owed to 
Harbour.  In this connection the Royal Court said as follows:  
“44. If this was a genuine claim for £73M, then it was inconceivable to us that no reference had been 
made to it in the previous proceedings before this Court, in which Dr Cochrane did file an affidavit (which 
made no reference to it) or at any time at all  in the dealings between Orb and Dr Cochrane on the one part 
and Harbour on the other.  It was inconceivable to us that, if the claim was genuine, Orb and Dr Cochrane 
were unable to give particulars of it sufficient to enable us to assess whether it was re asonably arguable.  
Furthermore, there was no explanation as to how such a substantial claim came to be filed before the High 
Court without legal advice a mere two days before the hearing.  
45. These arguments had been put forward by Orb and Dr Cochrane at the last moment without any 
evidence being filed in support on their behalf.  In our view, given the background of this matter, we would 
have expected at least an affidavit from Dr Cochrane  to assist us in the exercise of our discretion, an 
affidavit upon which she would, of course, have been susceptible to cross -examination.  She gave us no such 
assistance.”  
13 The Court concluded that to refuse or adjourn the applications for declarations of désastre  
would be unjust to Harbour and the other creditors.  
14 Having regard for various other considerations , the Court held that the requirements for 
granting a declaration of désastre  were met in respect of both Orb and Dr Cochrane and 
accordingly, on 24 November 2016, the Royal Court declared Orb and Dr Cochrane en 
désastre  (pages 810-817).   
a. Events following the declaration en désastre 
15 On 30 December 2016, Harbour filed a proof of debt in each of Orb and Dr Cochrane's 
respective désastres  (pages  818-847). Those proofs of debt have not yet been adjudicated 
by the Viscount.  
62 
 16 The Viscount applied to the Royal Court to issue two letters of request to the English 
Court.  Despite what Dr Cochrane had said in her affidavit for the bankruptcy hearing  
(pages 848-853), the Royal Court noted in its judgment of 16 February 2017  (pages 854- 
858) (giving reasons for issuing those letters of request) that (paragraph 9):  
"… Dr Cochrane has now asserted to the Viscount that she has very few assets.  According to her recently 
completed personal questionnaire and statement of income and expenditure required under Article 18 of 
the Law, Dr Cochrane has advised that her only as sets consist of six pieces of jewellery, two shares in a 
company known as Bodega Limited (“Bodega”) and an unknown value in a partnership, which the 
Viscount believes is a share in the medical practice from which she works.  Other items of value currently 
in her possession, which include a substantial art and wine collection, a rib, several high -value motor vehicles 
and other chattels are said to be owned by Bodega, of which the 99.9% shareholder is said to be Litigation 
Capital Funding, a New York based en tity believed to be owned by Mr Anthony Smith, the brother of 
Dr Gerald Smith.  Dr Smith is the former husband of Dr Cochrane and has twice been convicted of 
offences of fraud and served a prison sentence.  Dr Smith has advised the Viscount that Orb does n ot have 
nor has it ever had any assets."  
17 The judgment further noted that (paragraph 13):  
"Following the declarations en désastre, creditors had submitted claims, together with supporting documents, 
against Dr Cochrane in the sum of £765,532,125 and against Orb in the sum of £562,889,913.  The 
Viscount believes there is potentially some degree of duplication in the claims as some creditors have claimed 
against Dr Cochrane as guarantor of the obligations of Orb. Nevertheless, given the background described 
in the September judgment and the judgment of Popplewell J and the other matters referred t o above, the 
Viscount regards it as inconceivable that both Dr Cochrane and Orb have been able to acquire such colossal 
levels of debt without owning any of the assets listed by Harbour in its application for désastre.  The 
Viscount also notes that Dr Coch rane and Orb are subject to ongoing and vigorously fought legal 
proceedings in England.  Five such sets of proceedings are listed in her affidavit."  
b. Application for a retrospective extension of time to appeal  
18 On 31 December 2019, Dr Cochrane applied for an extension of time in which to appeal 
against the declaration of désastre  in her case  (pages 859-863).  This application first came 
before Birt JA as a single judge on 14 January 2020, who directed that the matter be 
brought to the full court  (page 86 4).  Dr Cochrane’s application was subsequently listed 
for hearing during the week commencing 27 July 2020.   
63 
 19 On 16 July 2020, Dr Cochrane applied for an adjournment, substantially on the basis that 
she had a short while earlier dismissed Advocate Blakeley and was planning to instruct a 
new firm of advocates  (pages 865-867).  That application for an adjournment was refused 
by the Court of Appeal in a short judgment dated 20 July 2020 (Cochrane v Harbour Fund 
II LLP and the Viscount [2020] JCA 140A)  (pages 868-872). The new firm was not in fact 
instructed and accordingly Dr Cochrane appeared as a litigant in person at the hearing.  
20 On Friday 24 July 2020 – the matter being listed for hearing on Tuesday 28 July  2020  – Dr 
Cochrane sent to the Court an affidavit dated 23 July  2020  (pages  873-880) together with 
various exhibits. By  a letter dated 27 July 2020  (pages 881-883), she purported to file two 
further documents.  Her application to adduce those documents was rejected  (pages 884-
920). 
21 The Court of Appeal also noted that (paragraph 100):  
"As to creditors, the Viscount states that the current value of claims in Dr Cochrane’s désastre is 
approximately £304,293,400, albeit that she has not yet adjudicated upon the claims because she considers 
it unfair to put potential creditors to the cost o f proving their claims in circumstances where the current 
English litigation is likely to result in the effective adjudication of many of these claims and where, pending 
the outcome of those proceedings, the present assets are insufficient to lead to any d istribution."  
22 The application for an extension of time was dismissed, the Jersey Court of Appeal finding:  
"104. … Given the extremely lengthy delay (nearly three years), and our conclusion that the reasons given 
for that delay do not provide justification, we would only consider extending the time for appealing if the 
merits of the proposed appeal were overwhe lming (to use Beloff JA’s expression).  That is certainly not the 
case.  As we have described earlier, we conclude that there are minimal prospects of Dr Cochrane being 
successful in showing that Harbour does not have a liquidated contractual claim in debt , or that she did 
not have realisable assets at the time of the désastre application.  Even in relation to whether Harbour has 
a proprietary claim to the assets which are the subject of the current English litigation, any case mounted 
on appeal would be at  best arguable; it is certainly not overwhelming.  
105.    The above factors are sufficient to lead to a rejection of this application. But when one adds in the 
factor that prejudice would be caused to Harbour and other parties if the application were to be allowed, 
the case for refusing to extend the time  for appealing is unanswerable."  
64 
 23 In a separate costs judgment, the Jersey  Court of Appeal awarded costs against Dr 
Cochrane on the indemnity basis  (pages 921-924). In respect of her application for an 
extension of time, it stated:  
"7. In our judgment, the Applicant’s conduct in pursuing the Application was unreasonable and takes the 
case out of the norm.  We so conclude for the following reasons:  
(i)        The delay was extreme (nearly 3 years when the time for appealing is 28 days) in circumstances 
where this Court found that there was no justification for this period of delay.  As the Court said at 
paragraph 104 of its judgment, this alone was s ufficient to lead to dismissal of the Application unless the 
merits of any appeal were overwhelming.  
(ii)       The period of delay and the inaction by the Applicant has also to be judged against the fact that, 
to the Applicant’s knowledge, administration of the désastre was continuing throughout this period.  
(iii)      Not only was there extreme delay without justification but this Court found that the prospects of 
success of any appeal were minimal and that its pursuit would cause prejudice not only to Harbour but also 
to other parties to the current English litigation, who had all proceeded and incurred time and expense on 
the basis that the Applicant was en désastre and that the Viscount was accordingly entitled to act on her 
behalf.  
24 Putting these matters together, we consider that pursuit of the Application was unreasonable and that it 
would not be a fair result for Harbour only to be able to recover the costs which it has incurred on the 
standard basis."  
25 As to the other applications, the Court of Appeal said (at paragraph 11) "In our judgment, the conduct 
of the Applicant both in relation to the adjournment application and the last minute applications for fresh 
evidence was unreasonable and justifies an aw ard of indemnity costs."  
c. Extension of Dr Cochrane's bankruptcy  
26 On 14 January 2021, the Royal Court granted an application by the Viscount to extend Dr 
Cochrane's bankruptcy for three years (to 24 November 2023), for the reasons set out in 
a judgment dated 29 January 2021  (pages 925-930). The Royal Court noted that:  
"3. The Viscount has taken control or possession of certain realisable assets of Dr Cochrane valued at 
approximately £75,000 and believes that Dr Cochrane also owns further realisable assets, including an 
interest in certain Jersey properties and movable p roperty located therein, and shares in various other 
65 
 companies.  However, the ownership of such further assets of Dr Cochrane is currently the subject of 
proceedings in the High Court of England and Wales (CL -2017-000323) (“the English Proceedings”).  
The English proceedings are highly complex, involving 47 parties and numerous personal and proprietary 
claims.  They are summarised in the judgment of the Court in Viscount v Smith [2020] JRC 043. …  
7. The claims filed by potential creditors in Dr Cochrane’s désastre total £305,261,798.37.  Due to the 
ongoing English Proceedings, the Viscount has not yet conducted an inspection of the creditors’ claims, nor 
has she formally adjudicated or admitted any  of them.  The Viscount considers that there is no utility in 
adjudicating any of the creditors’ claims until the present uncertainty is resolved as to whether, and to what 
extent, there may be any assets available for distribution in the désastre.  In her  view, it is also unfair to 
put the creditors to the cost of proving their claims in circumstances where the English Proceedings are likely 
to result in the effective adjudication of many of their claims, and there are presently no assets available for 
distribution."  
d. Further application for a (retrospective) application for an 
extension of time to appeal  
27 On 16 August 2023, Dr Cochrane sent an application to the Jersey Court of Appeal seeking 
an extension of time to appeal against the declarations en désastre  of both Dr Cochrane and 
Orb on the basis that the PACCAR Decision rendered the Harbour IA unlawful and 
unenforceable  (pages 931-933). On 18 August 2023, Harbour confirmed that it intended 
to oppose this very late, retrospective application for an extension of time  (page  934).  
28 As far as we are aware, no directions have been given by the Court of Appeal for the 
resolution of this application, if indeed it is still being pursued by Dr Cochrane.  
e. Further application for an extension of the bankruptcy  
29 On 3 October 2023, the Viscount issued an application for the further extension of Dr 
Cochrane's bankruptcy for a further three years (to 24 November 2027)  (pages 935-964), 
resulting in an order of the Jersey Court dated 6 October 2023, convening a substantive 
hearing ( pages 96 5-969).  
30 However, on 27 October 2023, the Viscount and Dr Cochrane agreed to the terms of a 
consent order that the hearing of that extension application be adjourned until after the 
determination of any recall application issued by Dr Cochrane  (pages  970-971).  
66 
 31 I understand from Harbour’s Jersey lawyer, Advocate Edward Drummond, that 
irrespective of the outcome of the Viscount's application to extend the bankruptcy of Dr 
Cochrane, Orb will remain in bankruptcy; the provisions of Articles 39 to 42 of the 
Bankruptcy ( Désastre ) (Jersey) Law 1990 only apply to individuals and do not apply to 
companies.  
f. Recall Application  
32 On 21 November 2023, Dr Cochrane issued a representation seeking the recall of the 
declarations en désastre  made in respect of her estate and the estate of Orb pursuant to 
Article 7 of the Désastre  (Bankruptcy) (Jersey) Law 1990 on the basis that they are both 
currently balance sheet solvent, with very small (or zero) claims against them, but with 
assets valued in the tens of millions of pounds.  I understand from Harbour’s Jersey lawyers, 
Bedell Cristin, that a recall petition such as this is adjudicated on  the basis of the petitioner’s 
balance sheet solvency as at the date of the application. Harbour’s position is that Dr 
Cochrane has misrepresented both the nature of the assets which the Court should take 
into account (most of which belong to Orb, or were subject to the LCL Settlement I refer 
to above) as well the value of those assets, which she has grossly inflated.  Additionally, 
Harbour contends that Dr Cochrane has also misrepre sented the liability position insofar 
as the claims of Harbour and other creditors are concerned.  
33 On 1 December 2023, the representation was adjourned to a convening hearing on 6 
February 202 4. On that date, for the reasons given in a judgment of the Royal Court dated 
23 February 2024  (pages  972-976), the Viscount was convened to the application. Dr 
Cochrane was given leave to file an Amended Representation (which she did, dated 7 
February 2024  (pages 977-991) and she also filed a further affidavit in support (her Third 
Affidavit sworn on 11 March 2024), which was served on creditors  (pages 34 8 – 364). 
34 On 18 June 2024, Harbour applied for a stay of the Amended Representation until 28 days 
after final resolution of Harbour's intended application to the English High Court for a 
declaration as to the status of the Direct Trial Judgment including as to the i mpact if any 
of the PACCAR Decision and related ancillary matters (“ Harbour’s Recall Stay 
Application ”). On 18 June 2024, I swore an affidavit in support of  Harbour’s Recall Stay 
Application  (pages 992-1008). 
35 A directions hearing in respect of Harbour’s Recall Stay Application took place on 25 June 
2024  (pages 1009-1010). The Court set out a timetable for the filling of further evidence 
67 
 and submissions from Harbour, Dr Cochrane and the Viscount.  Accordingly, on 2 August  
2024  Harbour filed its further evidence  (pages 1011-1018), and the Viscount subsequently 
filed evidence in respect of Dr Cochrane’s assertions regarding her asset and debt position 
on 8 and 2 3 August 2024  (pages 1019-1055). Dr Cochrane f iled responsive evidence on 10 
September 202 4 (pages 105 6-1062).